This is the same problem that we had in the last video.
But instead of trying to figure out whether the data supplies sufficient evidence to conclude that the engines meet the actual emissions requirement, and all of the hypothesis testing, I thought I would also use the same data that we had in the last video to actually come up with a 95% confidence interval.
So you could ignore the question right here.
You can ignore all of this.
I'm just using that same data to come up with a 95% confidence interval for the actual mean emission for this new engine design.
So we want to find a 95% confidence interval.
And as you could imagine, because we only have 10 samples right here, we're going to want to use a
And right down here I have a T-table.
And we want a 95% confidence interval.
So we want to think about the range of T-values that 95-- or the range that 95% of T-values will fall under.
So let's think about this way.
So let me draw a
T-distribution right over here.
So a T-distribution looks very similar to a normal distribution but it has fatter tails.
This end and this end will be fatter than in a normal distribution.
And then we want to find an interval, so if this is a normalized T-distribution the mean is going to be 0.
And we want to find interval of T-values between some negative value here and some positive value here that contains 95% of the probability.
So this right here has to be 95%.
And to figure what these critical T-values are at this end and this end, we can just use a T-table.
And we're going to use the two-sided version of this because we're symmetric around the center.
So you look at the two-sided, we want a 95% confidence interval, so we're going to look right over here, 95% confidence interval.
We have 10 data points, which means we have 9 degrees of freedom.
So 9 degrees of freedom for our 10 data points.
We just took 10 minus 1.
So if we look over here, so for a T-distribution with 9 degrees of freedom, you're going to have 95% of the probability is going to be contained within a T-value of-- so the T-value is going to be between negative, so this value right here is 2.262, and this value right here is negative 2.262.
That's what this right here tells us.
That if you contain all the values that are less than 2.262 away from the center of your T-distribution, you will contain 95% of the probability.
So that is our T-distribution right there.
Let me make it very clear.
This is our T-distribution.
So if you randomly pick a T-value from this
T-distribution, it has a 95% chance of being within this far from the mean.
Or maybe we should write this way.
If I pick a random T-value, if I take a random T-statistic-- let me write it this way-- there's a 95% chance that a random T-statistic is going to be less than 2.262, and greater than negative 2.262.
95% percent chance.
Now when we took this sample, we could also derive a random
T-statistic from this.
We have our sample mean and our sample standard deviation, our sample mean here is 17.17-- figured that out in the last video, just add these up, divide by 10-- and our sample standard deviation here is 2.98.
So the T-statistic that we can derive from this information right over here-- so let me write it over here-- the
T-statistic that we could derive from this, and you can view this T-statistic as being a random sample from a
T-distribution.
A T-distribution with 9 degrees of freedom.
So the T-statistic that we could derive from that is going to be our mean, 17.17 minus the true mean of our population.
Or actually you would say the true mean of our sampling distribution, which is also going to be the same as the true mean of our population, because that's our population mean over there, divided by s, which is 2.98 over the square root of our number of samples.
We've seen this multiple times.
This right here is the T-statistic.
So by taking this sample you can say that we've randomly sampled a T-statistic from this 9 degree of freedom
So there's a 95% chance that this thing right over here is going to be between-- is going to be less than 2.262 and greater than negative 2.262.
So the 95% probability still applies to this right here.
Now we just have to do some math, calculate these things.
So let me get my calculator out.
And so let me just calculate this denominator right over here.
So we have 2.98 divided by the square root of 10.
So that's 0.9423.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to multiply both sides of this equation by this expression right over here.
So if I do that-- so let me just do that right over-- so if I multiply this entire-- this is really two equations or two inequalities I should say.
That this quantity is greater than this quantity and that this quantity's greater than that quantity.
But we can operate on all of them at the same time, this entire inequality.
So what we want to do is multiply this entire inequality by this value right over here.
And we just calculated it at that value-- let me write it over here-- that 2.98-- I'll write it right over here-- 2.98 over the square root of 10 is equal to 0.942.
So if I multiplied this entire inequality by 0.942 I get, on this left-hand side over here I have negative 2.262 times 0.942-- and it's a positive number that we're multiplying the whole inequality by, so the inequality signs are still going to be in the same direction-- is less than-- we're multiplying this whole expression by the same expression in the denominator so it'll cancel out.
So we're just going to be less than 17.17 minus our population mean, which is going to be less than 2.262 times, once again, 0.942.
Let me scroll over to the right a little bit.
0.942.
Just be clear, I'm just multiplying all three sides of this inequality by this number right over here.
In the middle this cancels out.
So if I multiply-- I'll just write it over here-- 0.942, 0.942, 0.942.
This and this is the same number so that's why those cancel out.
And now let's get the calculator to figure out what these numbers are.
So if we have the 0.942 times 2.262.
So we're going to say times 2.262 is 2.13.
So this number right over here on the right-hand side is 2.13.
This number on the left is just the negative of that.
So it's negative 2.13.
And then we still have our inequalities-- is going to be less than 17.17 minus the mean, which is less than 2.13.
Now what I want to do is I actually want to solve for this mean.
And I don't like that negative sign in the mean.
I'd rather have this swapped around.
I'd rather have the mean minus 17.17.
So what I'm going to do is multiply this entire inequality by negative 1.
If you do that, if you multiply the entire thing times negative 1, this quantity right here, this negative 2.13 will become a positive 2.13.
But since we are multiplying an inequality by a negative number you have to swap the inequality sign.
So this less than will become a greater than.
This negative mu will become a positive mu.
This positive 17.17 will become a negative 17.17.
We're going to have to swap this inequality sign as well, and this positive 2.13 will become a negative 2.13.
And we're almost there.
We just want to solve for mu.
Have this inequality expressed in terms of mu.
So what we can do is now just add 17.17 to all three sides of this inequality, and we are left with 2.13 plus 17.17 is greater than mu minus 17.17 plus 17.17 is just going to be mu, which is greater than-- so this is greater than mu, which is greater than negative 2.13 plus 17.17.
Or a more natural way to write it since we actually have a bunch of greater than signs, that this is actually the largest number and this-- oh sorry, this is actually the smallest number and this over here is actually the largest number, is actually flipped-- you can just re-write this inequality the other way.
So now we can write-- actually let's just figure out what these values are.
So we have 2.13 plus 17.17.
So that is the high end of our range.
So that is 19.3.
So this value right over here, so this is 19-- let me do it in that same color-- this value right here is 19.3 is going to be greater than mu, which is going to be greater than-- and this is negative 2.13 plus 17.17.
Or we could have 17.17 minus 2.13, which gives us 15.04.
And remember, the whole thing, all of this, we started with, there was a 95% chance that a random T-statistic will fall in this interval.
We had a random T-statistic, and all we did is a bunch of math.
So there's a 95% chance that any of these steps are true.
So there's a 95% chance that this is true.
There's a 95% chance that the true population mean, which is the same thing as the mean of the sampling distribution of the sample mean, there's a 95% chance, or that we are confident that there's a 95% chance, that it will fall in this interval.
And we're done.
There's nothing subtle about 17th century Dutch genre painting.
So often we're shown interactions that are wonderfully bawdy and wonderfully explicit.
There is an exception, however: Jan Vermeer's paintings often are riddles, they give us suggestions of narratives.
And in this painting it's true, we're not really sure exactly what's about to unfold.
What we're seeing is a man who is still wearing his hat and outer cloak.
He stands beside a table with a beautiful carpet on it, and he has his hand on a jug of wine.
He looks like he's ready to refill the young woman's glass.
She's got it up to her mouth and she's just finishing it off.
Well, and he looks impatient to pour her another glass, as though the goal of this whole interaction is to get her drunk.
But across from her, at the window that is ajar, we can actually see a rendering in the stained glass of temperance, of moderation, in a sense an instruction to her to watch her step.
And so the painting is about possibility, it's about her choice, and the man whose face is shadowed by his hat is a little bit sinister in that way.
There's a sense of distance between the two figures, a sense that they're not terribly familiar with one another and I almost wonder whether the wine is gonna make that happen.
One of the reasons that the flirtation doesn't have an opportunity to be represented is because he's in shadow, we can just barely make out his eyes and her eyes are completely obscured by the shine in the beautifully delicate glass that she holds in front of her face.
She can't speak now, she's drinking, and she can't even see behind that glass, or at least, we can't see.
And yet that shine is all about vision, and it's held right at her eyes.
This is an early Vermeer, but already we can see his fascination with soft light: look at the way it infuses the space, comes through that blue curtain and the delicacy that he's lavished on the tonality of the back wall and the other forms in this room, it's just spectacular.
Well, Vermeer is interested in light.
We also have that characteristic geometry in the composition: the square of the window that's open, the rectangle of the frame on the back wall, the square on the back of the chair, and the squares that move back and the perspective on the floor.
There is this kind of checkerboard pattern that does create a clear, structured interior, and then we have objects that are placed askew of that so, you've got the line the window should trace, but the window is open, so that there's a diagonal that interrupts it.
You've got the careful rectilinear tiles on the floor but then you've got the chair, again, that's at an angle, and is offset from it.
In some ways this painting is about the disruption of order and the way objects are placed in this space are about the tension that's created when things are not aligned.
Perhaps that functions of a kind of metaphor for the interaction between the two figures.
Or a kind of foreboding about what may happen.
There are ways that the figures are linked.
Look at the concentric rings that fall from the man: you have his collar, then you've got a series of folds in the drapery that catch the light and sort of expand as they move down towards his arm.
And then that motion is picked up by the beautiful gold brocade in the woman's dress, and then the folds on her hip.
And so there really is a kind of harmony between those figures, and in some ways this painting is about harmony and disharmony, it's about alignment and things being askew.
And that's also symbolized in the musical instrument which is used in Vermeer's paintings to suggest both harmony and frivolity, so which way is this gonna go?
I'm not sure!
I think Vermeer is leaving that question open for the viewer.
By leaving this question open, Vermeer creates an image that is really poetic.
As we begin our journey into the world of economics,
I thought I would begin with a quote from one of the most famous economists of all time, the Scottish philosopher Adam Smith.
And he really is kind of the first real economist in the way that we view it now.
And this is from his The Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, coincidentally, the same year as the American Declaration of Independence, and it's one of his most-famous excerpts.
He generally indeed, he being an economic actor, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it.
By directing that industry, so that the industry in control of that individual actor in such a manner, as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain.
'He intends only his own gain'.
And he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention.
And this term "the invisible hand" is famous.
Led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention.
He is saying, look, when individual actors just act in their own self-interest, that often in aggregate leads to things that each of those individual actors did not intend.
Then he says: nor is it always the worst for society that it was no part of it.
So, it was not necessarily a bad thing.
By pursuing his own interest, he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it.
So, this is really a pretty strong statement.
It's really at the core of capitalism.
And that's why I point out that it was published in the same year as the American Declaration of Independence, because obviously America, the Funding Fathers, they wrote the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, that really talks about what it means to be a democratic country, what are the rights of its citizens.
But the United States, with its overall experience of an American, is at least as influenced by the work of Adam Smith, by this kind of foundational ideas of capitalism.
And they just both happened to happen around the same time.
But this idea is not always that intuitive.
Individual actors, by essentially pursuing their own self-interested ends might be doing more for society than than if any of them actually tried to promote the overall well-being of society.
And I don't think that Adam Smith would say that it's always good for someone to act self-interested, or that it's never good for people to actually think about the implications of what they are doing in an aggregate sense, but he is saying that frequently .. frequently, this self-interested action could lead to the greater good.
Could lead to more innovation.
Could lead to better investment.
Could lead to more productivity.
COuld lead to more wealth, more, a larger pie for everyone.
And now Economics is frequently .. and when he makes a statement, he is actually making a mix of micro-economic and macro-economic statements.
Micro is that people, individual actors are acting out of their own self-interest.
And the macro is that it might be good for the economy, or the nation as a whole.
And so, now, modern economists tend to divide themselves into these two schools, or into these two subjects: microeconomics, which is the study of individual actors.
Microeconomics .. and those actors could be firms, could be people, it could be households.
And you have macro-economics, which is the study of the economy in aggregate.
Macro-economics.
And you get it from the words.
Micro -- the prefix refers to very small things.
Macro refers to the larger, to the bigger picture.
And so, micro-economics is essentially how actors .. actors make decisions or, you could actually say 'allocations', allocations .. decisions or allocations.
Allocation .. of scarce resources.
And you hear the words scarce resources a lot when people talk about economics.
And a scarce resource is one you don't have an infinite amount of.
For example, love might not be a scarce resource.
You might have an infinite amount of love.
But a resource that would be scarce is something like food, or water, or money, or time, or labor.
These are all scarce resources.
And so microeconomics is how do people decide where to put those scarce resource, how do they decide where to deploy them.
And how does that .. does that affect prices and markets, and whatever else.
Macro-economics is the study of what happens at the aggregate to an economy.
So, 'aggregate', what happens in aggregate to an economy, from the millions of individual actors.
Aggregate economy.
We now have millions of actors.
And often focuses on policy-related questions.
SO, do you raise or lower taxes.
Or, what's going to happen when you raise or lower taxes.
Do you regulate or de-regulate?
How does that affect the overall productivity when you do this.
So, it's policy, top-down .. 'top-down' questions.
And in both macro- and micro-economics, there is especially in the modern sense of it, there is an attempt to make them rigorous, to make them mathematical.
So, in either case you could start with some of the ideas, some of the philosophical ideas, so of the logical ideas, to say someone like Adam Smith might have.
So, you have these basic ideas about how people think, how people make decisions.
So, philosophy, 'philosophy' of people, of decision-making, in the case of micro-economics -- 'decision-making'
And then you make some assumptions about it.
Or you simplify it .. let me write this .. you simplify it.
And you really are simplifying.
You say "oh, all people are rational",
"all people are gonna act in their own self-interest, or all people are going to maximize their gain", which isn't true -- human beings are motivated by a whole bunch of things.
We simplify things, so we can start to deal with it kind of a mathematical way.
SO you simplify it, so you can start dealing with it in a mathematical sense.
So, this is valuable to clarify your thinking.
It can allow you to prove things based on your assumptions.
And so, you can start to visualize things mathematically, with charts and graphs and think about what would actually happen with markets.
So it's very valuable to have this mathematical, rigorous, thinking.
But at the same time, it could be a little bit dangerous, because you are making these huge simplifications, and sometimes the math might lead you to some very strong conclusions.
Conclusions, which you might feel very strongly about, because it looks like you've proven them in the same way that you might prove relativity, but they were based on some assumptions that either might be wrong, or might be over-simplifications, or might not be relevant to the context that you're trying to make conclusions about.
So it's very very very important to take it all with a grain of salt, to remember that it's all based on some simplifying assumption.
And macro-economics is probably more guilty of it.
In micro-economics you are taking these deeply complicated things that are the human brain, how people act and respond to each other, and then you are aggregating it over millions of people, so it's ultra-complicated.
You've millions of these infinitely complicated people, all interacting with each other.
SO, it's very complicated.
Many millions of interactions, and fundamentally unpredictable interactions, and then trying to make assumptions on those, trying to make assumptions and then doing math with that -- that could lead you to some conclusions or might be leading you to some predictions.
And, once again, this is very important.
This is valuable, it is valuable to make these mathematical models, with these mathematical assumptions for these mathematical conclusions, but it always need to be taken with a grain of salt.
So, then you have a proper grain of salt, so that you are always focused on the true intuition.
And that's really the most important thing to get from a course on economics.
So you can truly reason through what's likely to happen, maybe even without the mathematics.
I'll leave you with two quotes.
And thse quotes are a little bit .. a little bit funny, but they're really I think helpful things to keep in mind, especially when you go deep into the mathematical side of economics.
So, this right over here is a quote by Aflred Knopf, who was publisher in the 1900s.
"An economist is a man who states the obvious in terms of the incomprehensible."
And I'm assuming what he is talking about as the incomprehensible, he is referring to some of the 'mathy' stuff that you see in economics, and hopefully we're going to make this as comprehensible as possible.
You'll see there is value in this.
But it's a very important statement he is making.
Oftentimes, it's taking a common-sense thing.
It's taking something that's obvious .. that's obvious.
And it's very important to always keep that in mind, to always make sure that you have the intuition for what's happening in the math, or to know when the math is going into a direction that might be strange based on over-simplifications or wrong assumptions.
And then you have this quote here by Lawrence J. Peter, most famous for Peter's Principals, a professor at USC.
"An economist is an expert know will know tomorrow why the things he predicted yesterday didn't happen today."
And once again -- important to keep in the back of one's mind, because especially relevant to macro-economics, because in macro-economics there is always all sorts of prediction about the state of the economy: about what need to be done, about how long the recession will last, what will be the economic growth next year, what will inflation do ... and they often prove to be wrong.
In fact, few economists even tend to agree on many of these things.
And it's very important to realize that, because oftentimes when you are deep in the mathematics, economics might seem to be a science, like physics, but it's not a science like physics.
It is open .. it is open to subjectivity, and a lot of that subjectivity is all around the assumptions that you choose to make.
What is the least common multiple, abbreviated as LCM, of 15, 6 and 10?
So the LCM is exactly what the word is saying, it is the least common multiple of these numbers.
And I know that probably did not help you much.
But lets actually work trough this problem.
So to do that, lets think of the different multiples of 15, 6 and 10. and then find the smallest multiple, the least multiple they have in common.
So, lets find the multiples of 15.
You have:
1 times 15 is 15, two times 15 is 30, then if you add 15 again you get 45, you add 15 again you get 60, you add 15 again, you get 75, you add 15 again, you get 90, you add 15 again you get 105. and if still none of these are common multiples with these guys over here then you may have to go further, but I will stop here for now.
Now that's the multiples of 15 up through 105.
Obviously, we keep going from there.
Now lets do the multiples of 6.
Let's do the multiples of 6:
1 times 6 is 6, two times 6 is 12, 3 times 6 is 18, 4 times 6 is 24, 5 times 6 is 30, 6 times 6 is 36, 7 times 6 is 42, 8 times 6 is 48, 9 times 6 is 54, 10 times 6 is 60.
60 already looks interesting, because it is a common multiple of both 15 and 60. Although we have to of them over here.
We have 30 and we have a 30, we have a 60 and a 60.
So the smallest LCM... ...so if we only cared about the least common multiple of 15 and 6.
We would say it is 30.
Lets write that down as an intermediate: the LCM of 15 and 6.
So the least common multiple, the smallest multiple that they have in common we see over here.
15 times 2 is 30 and 6 times 5 is 30.
So this is definitely a common multiple and it is the smallest of all of their LCMs.
60 is also a common multiple, but it is a bigger one.
This is the least common multiple.
So this is 30.
We have not thought of the 10 yet.
So lets bring the 10 in there.
I think you see where this is going.
Let's do the multiples of 10.
They are 10, 20, 30, 40... well, we already went far enough.
Because we already got to 30, and 30 is a common multiple of 15 and 6 and it is the smallest common multiple of all of them.
So it is actually the fact that the LCM of 15, 6 and 10 is equal to 30.
Now, this is one way to find the least common multiple.
Literally, just find and look at the multiples of each of the numbers... and then see what the smallest multiple is they have in common.
Another way to do that, is to look at the prime factorization of each of these numbers and the LCM is the number that has all the elements of the prime factorization of these and nothing else.
So let me show you what I mean by that.
So, you can do it this way or you can say that 15 is the same thing as 3 times 5 and that's it.
That is its prime factorization, 15 is 3 times 5, since both 3 and 5 are prime numbers.
We can say that 6 is the same thing as 2 times 3.
That's it, that is its prime factorization, since both 2 and 3 are prime.
And then we can say that 10 is the same thing as 2 times 5.
Both two and 5 are prime, so we are done factoring it.
So the LCM of 15, 6 and 10, just needs to have all of these prime factors.
And what I mean is... to be clear, in order to be divisible by 15 it has to have at least one 3 and at least one 5 in its prime factorization, so it needs to have one 3 and at least one 5.
By having a 3 times 5 in its prime factorization that ensures that this number is divisible by 15.
To be divisible by 6 it has to have at least one 2 and one 3.
So it has to have at least one 2 and we already have a 3 over here so that is all we want.
We just need one 3. So one 2 and one 3.
That is 2 times 3 and ensures we are divisible by 6.
And let me make it clear, this right here is the 15.
And then to make sure we are divisible by 10, we need to have at least one 2 and one 5.
These two over here make sure we are divisible by 10. and so we have all of them, this 2 x 3 x 5 has all of the prime factors of either 10, 6 or 15, so it is the LCM.
So if we multiply this out, you will get, 2 x 3 is 6, 6 x 5 is 30.
So either way.
Hopefully these kind of resonate with you and you see why they make sense.
This second way is a little bit better, if you are trying to do it for really complex numbers... ...numbers, where you might have to be multiplying for a really long time.
Well, either way, both of these are valid ways of finding the least common multiple.
In this video, we're going to look at how to draw a dot structure, which has a simple organic molecule, which has single bonds.
So, if I look at the molecular formula,
CH4, which is methane.
I want to draw a dot structure for the methane molecule.
I will go over here to my organic periodic table, and find carbon, and I can see carbon is in Group 4.
Therefore, carbon will have four valence electrons.
So, I can draw a carbon with its four valence electrons around it like that.
Remember from general chemistry, valence electrons are the electrons on the outer-most energy level.
So, carbon has four valence electrons in its outer-most energy level.
Next, I have to think about hydrogen, and hydrogen is in Group 1 on the Periodic Table.
Therefore, hydrogen will have one valence electron.
So, I can go ahead and put the hydrogen in there with one valence electron.
I know I have to do that three more times.
So, I keep putting the hydrogens each with one valence electron.
So, the total of four hydrogens.
And now, I can start connecting my dots.
I know that two valence electrons equal to one single covalent bond.
So, there is a single covalent bond.
There is a single covalent bond.
And then, I have two more here.
So, this is my complete dot structure for methane.
Now, I can see the carbon is surrounded by eight electrons here.
So, we can go ahead and highlight those.
So, if I count on the electrons around the carbons, it would be two, four, six and eight like that.
And eight electrons around the carbon makes carbon very stable.
And if we look at the Periodic Table, we can see why.
So, if i look at the second period,
I can see that the valence electron of the carbon would be one, two, three and four, and to get eight electrons, we will go to five, six, seven, eight. so, if carbon is surrounded by eight electrons, it's likely to have the electron configuration of noble gas, which makes it very stable, because all the orbitals in the energy level on are full. so, octetable electrons is the maximum number of electrons for the carbon. if we look at the hydrogen, we can see each hydrogen is surrounded by two electrons. so if i find the hydrogen here, the hydrogen is in the first energy level, so here is one electron, and here is two electrons so on the first energy level, there is only an s-orbital, and so that orbital holds maximum two electrons and we get to the electron configuration of the noble gas, and so hydrogen is stable with having only two electrons around it.
let's look at another dot structure, and let's do one tha has a nitrogen in it. so if i look at the molecular formula, CH3-NH2, i'm going to once again start with the carbon in the center, with its four valence electrons around it like that. and i know that three hydrogens on the carbon so i can go ahead and put three hydrogens each hydrogen has one valence electron, like that. and on the right side, i'm going to think about the nitrogen. i need to find the nitrogen in my periodic table. nitrogen is in Group 5.
Therefore, nitrogen has five valence electrons. so i can represent the electron as one, two, three, four and five, like that. and i still have two hydrogens to worry about, right? so i still have two hydrogens here. and i can see the place for them on the nitrogen. so i can go ahead and put a hydrogen in here, and a hydrogen in here, and connect the dots, and i have my dot structure. and i can also check my octet rule, so carbon has an octet, and nitrogen has an actet as well, so let's go ahead and verify that. so there is two electrons here, four, six, and eight. so nitrogen is in the second period, so nitrogen is also going to follow the octet rule, when you draw dot structures.
let's do one more. oxygen, next. so if i want to draw a dot structure, for methanol, methanol is CH3OH. so once again, i'll start carbon, with four valence electrons, and i have three hydrogens, each one with one valence electron like that so i can go ahead and put those three hydrogens next i have oxygen so i need to find the oxygen in my organic periodic table and i can see that oxygen is in group 6 right here so oxygen has six valence electrons around it so i can go ahead and draw in oxygen and i can put its six valence electrons in one, two, three, four, five and six like that and then i'm going to put in the hydrogen right? so i know now i have a hydrogen to worry about and i know hydrogen has one valence electron, so i can see there is a place for over here and once again i can connect the dots and see all of the single covalent bonds in this molecule. so that's one bond, that's another bond, now i can see that carbon is bonded to oxygen, and oxygen is bonded to this hydrogen as well again we can check our octet rule so, the carbon has eight electrons around it so is the oxygen this will be two right here and then four, and then six, and then eight so the oxygen is following the octet rule now when you are drawing a dot structure, you don't always have to do this stuff where you are drawing each individual atom, and summing all the valence electron in that way you can just start drawing it so for example, if i gave you C2H6, which is ethyne another way to do it is we just do we'd just be started drawing the bonds here so i have two carbons, and there is a pretty good bet that the two carbons are connected to each other and i have six hydrogens and if i look at what's possible around those carbons, i could put those six hydrogens around those two carbon atoms like that and if i do that, i will have octet around each carbon atom so this would be my dot structure for ethyne. to double-check yourself, you could make sure that your dot structure has the correct number of valence electrons so if i'm thinking about each carbon, each carbon having four valence electrons, and i have two of them, i'm going to get eight valence electrons from those two carbons that i have to represent in my dot structure each hydrogen has one valence electron and i have six of them so i need to worry about six valence electron of hydrogens so the total of 14 so i'm look at my dot strcuture i can check to make sure i have the correct number of valence electrons i need 14, so let's go ahead and count them so this will be two here, four, six, eight, ten, twelve and fourteen so i have the correct number of valence electrons represented in my dot structure i also have an octet of electrons around my carbons so this would be the dot structure for ethane
Dear Nickelodeon, I've gotten over how Sponge Bob's pants are not actually square, I can ignore most of the time that Gary's shell is not a logarithmic spiral, but what I cannot forgive is that Sponge Bob's pineapple house is a mathematical impossibility!
There's three easy ways to find spirals on a pineapple.
There's the ones that wind up it going right, the ones that spiral up to the left, and the ones that go almost straight up. Keyword: almost.
If you count the number of spiral going left, and the number of spirals going right, they'll be adjacent Fibonacci numbers.
Three and five, or five and eight, eight and thirteen, or thirteen and twenty-one.
You claim that that Sponge Bob square pants lives in a pineapple under the sea, but does he really?
A true pineapple would have Fibonacci spirals, so let's take a look.
Because these images of his house don't let us pick it up and turn it around and count the number of spirals going around it, it might be hard to figure out whether it's mathematically a pineapple or not but there's a huge clue in the third spiral, the one going upwards
In this pineapple, there's eight to the right, thirteen to the left, you can add those numbers together to get how many numbers are in the set spiraling steeply upwards.
In this case, twenty-one.
The three sets of spirals in any pineapple are pretty much always adjacent Fibonacci numbers.
The rare mutant cases might show Lucas numbers or something, but it will always be three adjacent numbers in a series
What you'll never have is the same number of spirals both ways.
Pineapples, unlike people, don't have bilateral symmetry.
You'll never have the third spiral be not a spiral but just a straight line going up a pineapple.
Yet, when we look at Sponge Bob's supposed pineapple under the sea, it clearly has lines of pineapple things going straight up.
It clearly has bilateral symmetry.
It clearly is not actually a pineapple at all because no pineapple could possibly grow that way.
Nickelodeon, you need to take a long, hard look in the mirror and think about the way you're misrepresenting the universe to your viewers.
This kind of mathematical oversight is simply irresponsible.
Sincerely, Vi Hart.
In the last video we had a three-dimensional surface, where the height z was a function of x and y.
And it gave us surface in three-dimensional space.
Now let's try to get our heads around what the gradient of a function of three variables looks like.
So the easiest one for me to imagine is a scalar field.
So what's a scalar field?
One that I find fairly intuitive is temperature in a three-dimensional room.
So let's say the temperature in a room is a function of where I am in the room.
So let's say it's a function of my x, y, and z coordinates.
And I don't know, I have never actually modeled temperature.
But let's say I have, I don't know, a 20 kelvin-- actually, let me make it so that our vector field works out right.
Let's say we have a 10 kelvin heat force in the center of our room.
I can imagine as you go further and further away from that heat source it's going to get colder and colder.
So let's say that the temperature function.
And let's say that center of the room is at the coordinates x, y, and z is equal to 0.
So let's say our temperature function-- I'm just making this up, I don't know if this is an accurate model of temperature-- it's equal to 10 times e to the minus r squared.
Now why did I say r?
I said it's a function of x, y, and z.
Well I'm just saying that it exponentially decays as you get further and further away from that source.
Kind of radially further and further away from that source.
So what's the radial distance away?
And this actually isn't that relevant to learning gradients, but let's get a little intuition about what that actual temperature function-- how it actually changes as you go through the room.
So the radius away from the center, that's just going to be r squared is just x squared plus y squared plus z squared.
That's just the Pythagorean theorem in three dimensions.
So let's write our temperature function.
So let's write temperature as a function of x, y, and z is equal to 10 e to the minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared-- which is exactly what I wrote up here.
Instead of x squared plus y squared plus z squared, I wrote r squared, just to kind of give you the intuition that this expression is just saying the square of the distance as we get away from the center of our room, or from the coordinate 0, 0, 0.
But that's not what we're learning here.
But I want you to understand, at least conceptualize this, it's hard to draw a scalar field.
All a scalar field means is that in any point in this base-- and in this case we're dealing with three-dimensional space-- at any point in that space we can associate a value.
And that makes sense.
If you were to take a thermometer and measure any point in space in the room that you're in right now, you would get a temperature.
You wouldn't get a temperature and a direction, so it's not a vector field.
You would just get a temperature.
And that's why it's called a scalar field.
Associated with every coordinate is just a temperature.
So how would we view the gradient of this function?
Well the gradient of this function is going to tell us in which direction-- and actually, the gradient of this function is going to generate a vector field, because it's going to tell us in which direction do we have the largest increase in temperature.
And also, the magnitude of those vectors in that vector field will tell us how large of an increase in temperature we are looking at.
Or you can kind of view it as almost a three-dimensional slope.
Hope that doesn't confuse you.
So let's compute the gradient, and then I'll show you a diagram that might make things a little bit more intuitive.
Let me erase this thing down here.
And I'm going to switch from this blue color, because it's a little nauseating.
So the gradient of T is going to be equal to the partial derivative T with respect to x times the unit vector in the x direction, plus the partial derivative of the temperature function with respect to y times the unit vector in the y direction, plus the partial derivative of the temperature function with respect to z times the unit vector in the z direction.
And now we just plug and chug and figure out the partial derivatives.
So the gradient of T is equal to-- now you might be daunted.
Oh, I have an e to this three variable function, how do I take the partial derivative?
Remember, if you're taking the partial derivative with respect to x you just pretend like the y's and the z's are constants.
So let's do that.
So let's take the derivative of the inside function.
That's the way I view it.
So minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared, with respect to x.
So you could distribute this minus if you like.
So it'd be minus x squared minus y squared minus z squared.
So the derivative of that with respect to x is just going to be-- these are just constants, so the derivative with respect to x is just 0.
So the derivative is minus 2x. Right?
Minus 2x is the derivative of minus x squared.
Minus 2x times the derivative of the outside.
Well, what's the derivative of e to the x?
The derivative of e to the x is e to the x.
That's why e is such an amazing number.
And this 10 here, this is just a constant that when you take the derivative of a constant times something the constant carries over.
So the derivative of the outside expression, the way I imagine it, is equal to 10 e to the minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared.
And then all of that times the unit vector in the i direction. Right?
And now we can do the same thing for the y direction.
So plus-- what's the partial derivative of this with respect to y?
Well it's going to look very similar.
The partial derivative of this inner function with respect to y, it's minus y squared.
So it's minus 2y.
And then the derivative of the whole thing is just itself again.
So times 10 e to the minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared.
And then all of that times the unit vector in the y direction times j.
And then finally, the partial derivative of the temperature function with respect to z.
And that's just minus 2z times 10 e to the minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared.
This is just the chain rule.
And I'm treating the other two variables that I'm not taking the partial derivative with respect to, as constants.
And then all of that times the unit vector in the k direction.
And we could simplify this a little bit.
You could have minus 2x times 10.
That's minus 20x.
Let me write it up here.
So the gradient of the temperature function is equal to minus 20 e to the minus x squared plus y squared-- you probably can't read this-- plus z squared, times i minus 20y.
And actually, I'm not going to go into that, because I realize
I'm running out of time.
I think you can simplify this algebraically.
But anyway, the more important thing is I always find with gradients it's easy to calculate them, but the intuition-- oh sorry.
This is also included.
This is a k right here.
The harder part is the intuition.
So let's get an intuition of what this gradient function will actually look like.
So what would happen.
If you wanted to know the gradient at any point in space, you would substitute an x, y, and z in here.
So you could write it as the gradient function is a function of x, y, and z.
Remember, T, the temperature at any point, was a scalar field.
At any point in three dimensions it just gave you a number.
Now when you have the gradient, at any point in three dimensions it gives you a vector. Right?
Because it has i, j, and k components.
Where the magnitude are the partial derivatives, and then the direction is given by i, j, and k.
So we've gone from having a scalar field to a vector field.
And let's see what it looks like.
And let me make it bigger so we can explore it a little bit.
I think that's pretty good.
So this is the vector field.
This is actually the gradient of the function that we just solved for.
And as you can see, at any point-- and when this graphing program that did it, it just picked different points and it calculated the gradients at that point, and then it graphed them as vectors.
So the length of the vectors are just the magnitudes of the x, y, and z components.
And then you add them together like you would add any vectors.
And then the direction is given by the relative weighting of the i, j, and k components.
And as you can see, the intuition is pretty interesting.
As you get closer and closer to our heat source, the rate at which the temperature increases, increases! Right?
The vectors as you get closer, get bigger and bigger.
And let me zoom in.
Let's actually fly in to the vector field.
So we're now within the vector field.
And you can see as we get closer and closer to the center of our heat source, the vectors, the rate at which the temperature increases, gets bigger and bigger and bigger.
Anyway, I hope I didn't confuse you.
When I first learned gradients, I think the computation is relatively straightforward.
It's just partial derivatives.
But the intuition is always the interesting thing.
And hopefully this temperature analogy-- and not even analogy-- this temperature model will make a little sense to you.
But it applies to pretty much any scalar field.
We're standing in front of an unfinished painting by Leonardo da Vinci.
It's a big painting, and interestingly almost a perfect square.
It's really unfinished, not just some parts.
It's really just the underpainting.
This is the Adoration of the Magi.
A moment in Christian story when Christ has just been born and three kings from the east, guided by the star of Bethlehem, come to Mary and offer Christ three gifts: frankincense, myrrh, and gold.
Which revealed to us here, is Leonardo's working method
Not only his brilliant drawing, but the way which he constructs figures.
Remember, that Leonardo is first and foremost not a painter, he's really a scientist, an engineer.
Somebody who looks and understands nature.
We sense Leonardo's deep understanding of human anatomy.
When he paints clothed figures, he's understanding the skeletal structures, the musculature of the body
If you look to the group of figures to the right, about midlevel you see a figure that almost looks like a skull, as if literally
Leonardo reconstructs the bones, before he put flesh on them, before he put clothes on them, before he adds colors.
That's a group of figures that often referred to as the philosophers.
But may be we should discuss the central group first.
We have Mary and the Christ child, front and center, forming a pyramid shape together with the Magi in front.
That's the shape that we see very often in paintings of the high Renaissance that provides a stable form.
You see that here in the foreground with Mary and Christ.
It is essentially important in this painting which is so chaotic, with so much going on.
At the upper right, there is a battle of 2 horses rearing up at the upper left, a fragment of a classical architecture. the wonderful steps and perfect linear perspective.
Leonardo did a brilliant drawing in preparation of this painting.
But let's look more closely to define the pyramid lines.
Start with the Virgin Mary and look at her face.
She's glancing across the top of her son's head down his arms, he 'picks up' her glance and brings her eye down until it is met by the Magi who's offering a gift.
Run the line down, past his toes, to the corner of the painting.
Or we can pick up from Mary and go the other way.
From the bridge of her nose, across her shoulders, picked up by the kneeling figure at the left.
Interestingly, it is not simply a triangle, but a pyramid that comes forward as it moves down.
In the existing space, I'm struck by Leonardo's attention to all of the human reactions to the situation.
A lot of faces, half hidden in the darkness, and a lot of gestures.
It reminds me to the Leonardo's Last Supper, Christ in the middle forming the pyramid with his outstretched arms, the chaos and reactions of the apostles.
It brings a stability in the center.
It is a characteristic of the High Renaissance: a notion of balance, perfection, eternal.. and also how we as human reacts.
There is another important element here, a characteristic of Leonardo.
Even as an underpainting, we can identify it.
It is a technique of Sfumato, in Italian is "smoke".
A visual glue that creates harmony between forms within the paintings brings things together and keeps the painting from the sense of isolation which is the characteristic of the early Renaissance.
Instead of figures being defined by lines, the figures are enveloped in atmospheric haze or softness, smokiness.
It makes them to emerge out of the darkness into light, then fade back into the darkness again.
Leonardo unifies the figures in the pyramid composition through their glances and gestures, but also through that smoky atmosphere.
We see this beautiful smoke, beautiful lines,.. composition, complex sense of motion.
I would love to know how this painting looks like, had it been finished. Me too.
We know from the last video that if we have a high calcium ion concentration inside of the muscle cell, those calcium ions will bond to the troponin proteins which will then change their shape in such a way that the tropomyosin will be moved out of the way and so then the myosin heads can crawl along the actin filaments and them we'll actually have muscle contractions.
So high calcium concentration, or calcium ion concentration, we have contraction.
Low calcium ion concentration, these troponin proteins go to their standard confirmation and they pull-- or you can say they move the tropomyosin back in the way of the myosin heads-- and we have no contraction.
So the next obvious question is, how does the muscle regulate whether we have high calcium concentration and contraction or low calcium concentration and relaxation?
Or even a better question is, how does the nervous system do it?
How does the nervous system tell the muscle to contract, to make its calcium concentration high and contract or to make it low again and relax?
And to understand that, let's do a little bit a review of what we learned on the videos on neurons.
Let me draw the terminal junction of an axon right here.
Instead of having a synapse with a dendrite of another neuron, it's going to have a synapse with an actual muscle cell.
So this is its synapse with the actual muscle cell.
Let me label everything just so you don't get confused.
This is the axon.
We could call it the terminal end of an axon.
Just a little terminology from the neuron videos-- this space was a synaptic cleft.
This is the presynaptic neuron.
This is-- I guess you could kind of view it-- the post-synaptic cell.
It's not a neuron in this case.
And then just so we have-- this is our membrane of muscle cell.
In this, it'll be a little abstract because we really want to understand how the calcium ion concentration is regulated.
This is called a sarcolemma.
And this right here-- you could imagine it's just a fold into the membrane of the muscle cell.
If I were to look at the surface of the muscle cell, then it would look like a little bit of a hole or an indentation that goes into the cell, but here we did a cross section so you can imagine it folding in, but if you poked it in with a needle or something, this is what you would get.
You would get a fold in the membrane.
And this right here is called a T-tubule.
It's going transverse to the surface of the membrane.
And over here-- and this is the really important thing in this video, or the really important organelle in this video.
You have this organelle inside of the muscle cell called the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
And it actually is very similar to an endoplasmic reticulum in somewhat of what it is or maybe how it's related to an endoplasmic reiticulum-- but here its main function is storage.
While an endoplasmic reticulum, it's involved in protein development and it has ribosomes attached to it, but this is purely a storage organelle.
What the sarcoplasmic reticulum does it has calcium ion pumps on its membrane and what these do is they're ATP aces, which means that they use ATP to fuel the pump.
So you have ATP come in, ATP attaches to it, and maybe a calcium ion will attach to it, and when the ATP hydrolyzes into ADP plus a phosphate group, that changes the confirmation of this protein and it pumps the calcium ion in.
So the calcium ions get pumped in.
So the net effect of all of these calcium ion pumps on the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum is in a resting muscle, we'll have a very high concentration of calcium ions on the inside.
When the muscle needs to contract, these calcium ions get dumped out into the cytoplasm of the cell.
And then they're able to bond to the troponin right here, and do everything we talked about in the last video.
So what we care about is, just how does it know when to dump its calcium ions into the rest of the cell?
This is the inside of the cell.
And so this area is what the actin filaments and the myosin heads and all of the rest, and the troponin, and the tropomyosin-- they're all exposed to the environment that is over here.
So you can imagine-- I could just draw it here just to make it clear.
We'll see more of the structure in a future video.
So let's say this neuron-- and we'll call this a motor neuron-- it's signaling for a muscle contraction.
So first of all, we know how signals travel across neurons, especially across axons with an action potential.
We could have a sodium channel right here.
It's voltage gated so you have a little bit of a positive voltage there.
That tells this voltage gated sodium channel to open up.
So it opens up and allows even more of the sodium to flow in.
That makes it a little bit more positive here.
So then that triggers the next voltage gated channel to open up-- and so it keeps traveling down the membrane of the axon-- and eventually, when you get enough of a positive threshold, voltage gated calcium channels open up.
This is all a review of what we learned in the neuron videos.
So eventually, when it gets positive enough close to these calcium ion channels, they allow the calcium ions to flow in.
And the calcium ions flow in and they bond to those special proteins near the synaptic membrane or the presynaptic membrane right there.
These are calcium ions.
They bond to proteins that were docking vesicles.
Remember, vesicles were just these membranes around neurotransmitters.
When the calcium binds to those proteins, it allows exocytosis to occur.
It allows the membrane of the vesicles to merge with the membrane of the actual neuron and the contents get dumped out.
This is all review from the neuron videos.
I explained it in much more detail in those videos, but you have-- all of these neurotransmitters get dumped out.
And we were talking about the synapse between a neuron and a muscle cell.
The neurotransmitter here is acitocolin.
But just like what would happen at a dendrite, the acetylcholine binds to receptors on the sarcolemma or the membrane of the muscle cell and that opens sodium channels on the muscle cell.
So the muscle cell also has a a voltage gradient across its membrane, just like a neuron does.
So when this guy gets some acetylcholene, it allows sodium to flow inside the muscle cell.
So you have a plus there and that causes an action potential in the muscle cell.
So then you have a little bit of a positive charge.
If it gets high enough to a threshold level, it'll trigger this voltage gated channel right here, which will allow more sodium to flow in.
So it'll become a little bit positive over here.
Of course, it also has potassium to reverse it.
It's just like what's going on in a neuron.
So eventually this action potential-- you have a sodium channel over here.
It gets a little bit positive.
When it gets enough positive, then it opens up and allows even more sodium to flow in.
So you have this action potential. and then that action potential-- so you have a sodium channel over here-- it goes down this T-tubule.
So the information from the neuron-- you could imagine the action potential then turns into kind of a chemical signal which triggers another action potential that goes down the T-tubule.
And this is the interesting part-- and actually this is an area of open research right now and I'll give you some leads if you want to read more about this research-- is that you have a protein complex that essentially bridges the sarcoplasmic reticulum to the T-tubule.
And I'll just draw it as a big box right here.
So you have this protein complex right there.
And I'll actually show it-- people believe-- I'll sort some words out here.
It involves the proteins triodin, junctin, calsequestran, and rianodine.
But they're somehow involved in a protein complex here that bridges between the T-tubule the sarcoplasmic verticulum, but the big picture is what happens when this action potential travels down here-- so we get positive enough right around here, this complex of proteins triggers the release of calcium.
And they think that the ryanodine is actually the part that actually releases the calcium, but we could just say that it-- maybe it's triggered right here.
When the action potential travels down-- let me switch to another color.
I'm using this purple too much.
When the action potential gets far enough-- I'll use red right here-- when the action potential gets far enough-- so this environment gets a little positive with all those sodium ions flowing in, this mystery box-- and you could do web searches for these proteins.
People are still trying to understand exactly how this mystery box works-- it triggers an opening for all of these calcium ions to escape the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
So then all these calcium ions get dumped into the outside of the sarcoplasmic reticulum into-- just the inside of the cell, into the cytoplasm of the cell.
Now when that happens, what's doing to happen?
Well, the high calcium concentration, the calcium ions bond to the troponin, just like what we said at the beginning of the video.
The calcium ions bond to the troponin, move the tropomyosin out of the way, and then the myosin using ATP like we
learned two videos ago can start crawling up the actin-- and at the same time, once the signal disappears, this thing shuts down and then these calcium ion pumps will reduce the calcium ion concentration again.
And then our contraction will stop and the muscle will get relaxed again.
So the whole big thing here is that we have this container of calcium ions that, when the muscles relax, is essentially taking the calcium ions out of the inside of the cell so the muscle is relaxed so that you can't have your myosin climb up the actin.
But then when it gets the signal, it dumps it back in and then we actually have a muscle contraction because the tropomyosin gets moved out of the way by the troponin., So I don't know.
That's pretty fascinating.
It's actually even fascinating that this is still not completely well understood.
This is an active-- if you want to become a biological researcher, this could be an interesting thing to try to understand.
One, it's interesting just from a scientific point of view of how this actually functions, but there's actually-- there's maybe potential diseases that are byproducts of malfunctioning proteins right here.
Maybe you can somehow make these things perform better or worse, or who knows.
So there actually are positive impacts that you could have if you actually figured out what exactly is going on here when the action potential shows up to open up this calcium channel.
So now we have the big picture.
We know how a motor neuron can stimulate a contraction of a cell by allowing the sarcoplasmic reticulum to allow calcium ions to travel across this membrane in the cytoplasm of the cell.
And I was doing a little bit of reading before this video.
These pumps are very efficient.
So once the signal goes away and this door is closed right here, this this sarcoplasmic reticulum can get back the ion concentration in about 30 milliseconds.
So that's why we're so good at stopping contractions, why I can punch and then pull back my arm and then have it relax all within split-seconds because we can stop the contraction in 30 milliseconds, which is less than 1/30 of a second.
So anyway, I'll see in the next video, where we'll study the actual anatomy of a muscle cell in a little bit more detail.
We've got a scale here, and as you see, the scale is balanced.
And we have a question to answer.
We have this mystery mass over here.
It's a big question mark on this blue mass.
And we also have a bunch of 1 kilogram masses.
These are all each a 1kg mass.
And my question to you is:
What could we do to either side of this scale in order to figure out what the mystery mass is?
Or maybe we can't figure it out at all?
Is there something that we can do either removing or adding these things, so that we can figure out what this mystery mass is?
I will give you a couple of seconds to think about it.
To figure out what this mystery mass is, we essentially just want this on one side of this scale
But that by itself is not enough.
We could just remove these three, but that won't do the job, because if we just remove these three, then the left side of this scale is clearly going to have less mass, and it will go up, and the right side will go down.
And that will not give us much information.
It would just tell us that this blue thing has a lower mass than what is over here.
So just removing this will not help us much.
I won't let us know that this is equal to that.
What we have to do if we want to keep the scale balanced, is that we have to remove the same amount of mass from both sides of the scale.
So, if we want to remove 3 things here, (let me try my best to remove 3 things here) (I will just erase it)
If we want to remove 3 things there,
If we did this by itself, just removed these 3 things, the two sides would not have an equal mass anymore. this side would have a lower mass.
So we have to remove 3 from both sides.
If we want to make sure our scale is balanced, we have to remove 3 from both sides.
If we started off with the scales balanced, and then we removed 3 from both sides, the scale will still be balanced and then we would have a clear idea of what the mass of this object actually is.
Now, with 3 removed from both sides, the scale will still be balanced, and we know that this mass is equal to whatever is left over here.
It is equal to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
- and if we're assuming they are kilograms - we'll know that the question mark mass question mark is equal to 7 kilograms.
So this is a seven kilogram mass.
What I'm going to attempt to do in the next two videos is really just give an overview of everything that's happened to Earth since it came into existence.
We're going start really at the formation of Earth or the formation of our Solar system or the formation of the Sun, and our best sense of what actually happened is that there was a supernova in our vicinity of the galaxy, and this right here is a picture of a supernova remnant, actually, the remnant for Kepler's supernova.
The supernova in this picture actually happened four hundred years ago in 1604, so right at the center a star essentially exploded and for a few weeks was the brightest object in the night sky, and it was observed by Kepler and other people in 1604, and this is what it looks like now.
What we see is kinda the shockwave that's been traveling out for the past 400 years, so now it must be many
light years across.
It wasn't, obviously, matter wasn't traveling at the speed of light, but it must've been traveling pretty, pretty fast, at least relativistic speeds, a reasonable fraction of the speed of light.
This has traveled a good bit out now, but what you can imagine is when you have the shockwave traveling out from a supernova, let's say you had a cloud of molecules, a cloud of gas, that before the shockwave came by just wasn't dense enough for gravity to take over, and for it to accrete, essentially, into a solar system.
When the shockwave passes by it compresses all of this gas and all of this material and all of these molecules, so it now does have that critical density to form, to accrete into a star and a solar system.
We think that's what's happened, and the reason why we feel pretty strongly that it must've been caused by a supernova is that the only way that the really heavy elements can form, or the only way we know that they can form is in kind of the heat of a supernova, and our uranium, the uranium that seems to be in our solar system on Earth, seems to have formed roughly at the time of the formation of Earth, at about four and a half billion years ago, and we'll talk in a little bit more depth in future videos on exactly how people figure that out, but since the uranium seems about the same age as our solar system, it must've been formed at around the same time, and it must've been formed by a supernova, and it must be coming from a supernova, so a supernova shockwave must've passed through our part of the universe, and that's a good reason for gas to get compressed and begin to accrete.
So you fast-forward a few million years.
That gas would've accreted into something like this.
It would've reached the critical temperature, critical density and pressure at the center for ignition to occur, for fusion to start to happen, for hydrogen to start fusing into helium, and this right here is our early sun.
Around the sun you have all of the gases and particles and molecules that had enough angular velocity to not fall into the sun, to go into orbit around the sun.
They were actually supported by a little bit of pressure, too, because you can kinda view this as kind of a big cloud of gas, so they're always bumping into each other, but for the most part it was their angular velocity, and over the next tens of millions of years they'll slowly bump into each other and clump into each other.
Even small particles have gravity, and they're gonna slowly become rocks and asteroids and, eventually, what we would call
"planetesimals," which are, kinda view them as seeds of planets or early planets, and then those would have a reasonable amount of gravity and other things would be attracted to them and slowly clump up to them.
This wasn't like a simple process, you know, you could imagine you might have one planetesimal form, and then there's another planetesimal formed, and instead of having a nice, gentle those two guys accreting into each other, they might have huge relative velocities and ram into each other, and then just, you know, shatter, so this wasn't just a nice, gentle process of constant accretion.
It would actually have been a very violent process, actually happened early in Earth's history, and we actually think this is why the Moon formed, so at some point you fast-forward a little bit from this, Earth would have formed,
I should say, the mass that eventually becomes our modern Earth would have been forming.
Let me draw it over here.
So, let's say that that is our modern Earth, and what we think happened is that another proto-planet or another, it was actually a planet because it was roughly the size of Mars, ran into our, what it is eventually going to become our Earth.
This is actually a picture of it.
This is an artist's depiction of that collision, where this planet right here is the size of Mars, and it ran into what would eventually become Earth.
This we call Theia.
This is Theia, and what we believe happened, and if you look up, if you go onto the Internet, you'll see some simulations that talk about this, is that we think it was a glancing blow.
It wasn't a direct hit that would've just kinda shattered each of them and turned into one big molten ball.
We think it was a glancing blow, something like this.
This was essentially Earth.
Obviously, Earth got changed dramatically once Theia ran into it, but Theia is right over here, and we think it was a glancing blow.
It came and it hit Earth at kind of an angle, and then it obviously the combined energies from that interaction would've made both of them molten, and frankly they probably already were molten because you had a bunch of smaller collisions and accretion events and
little things hitting the surface, so probably both of them during this entire period, but this would've had a glancing blow on Earth and essentially splashed a bunch of molten material out into orbit.
It would've just come in, had a glancing blow on Earth, and then splashed a bunch of molten material, some of it would've been captured by Earth, so this is the before and the after, you can imagine, Earth is kind of this molten, super hot ball, and some of it just gets splashed into orbit from the collision.
Let me just see if I can draw Theia here, so
Theia has collided, and it is also molten now because huge energies, and it splashes some of it into orbit.
If we fast-forward a little bit, this stuff that got splashed into orbit, it's going in that direction, that becomes our Moon, and then the rest of this material eventually kind of condenses back into a spherical shape and is what we now call our Earth.
So that's how we actually think right now that the Moon actually formed.
Even after this happened, the Earth still had a lot more,
I guess, violence to experience.
Just to get a sense of where we are in the history of Earth, we're going to refer to this time clock a lot over the next few videos, this time clock starts right here at the formation of our solar system, 4.6 billion years ago, probably coinciding with some type of supernova, and as we go clockwise on this diagram, we're moving forward in time, and we're gonna go all the way forward to the present period, and just so you understand some of the terminology,
"Ga" means "billions of years ago"
'G' for "Giga-"
"Ma" means "millions of years ago"
'M' for "Mega-"
So where we are right now, the Moon has formed, and we're in what we call the Hadean period or actually I shouldn't say "period."
It's the Hadean eon of Earth.
"Period" is actually another time period, so let me make this very clear.
It's the Hadean, we are in the Hadean eon, and an eon is kind of the largest period of time that we talk about, especially relative to Earth, and it's roughly 500 million to a billion years is an eon, and what makes the Hadean eon distinctive, well, from a geological point of view what makes it distinctive is really we don't have any rocks from the
Hadean period.
We don't have any kind of macroscopic-scale rocks from the Hadean period, and that's because at that time, we believe, the Earth was just this molten ball of kind of magma and lava, and it was molten because it was a product of all of these accretion events and all of these collisions and all this kinetic energy turning into heat.
If you were to look at the surface of the Earth, if you were to be on the surface of the Earth during the Hadean eon, which you probably wouldn't want to be because you might get hit by a falling meteorite or probably burned by some magma, whatever, it would look like this, and you wouldn't be able to breathe anyway; this is what the surface of the Earth would look like.
It would look like a big magma pool, and that's why we don't have any rocks from there because the rocks were just constantly being recycled, being dissolved and churned inside of this giant molten ball, and frankly the Earth still is a giant molten ball, it's just we live on the super-thin, cooled crust of that molten ball.
If you go right below that crust, and we'll talk a little bit more about that in future videos, you will get magma, and if you go dig deeper, you'll have liquid iron.
I mean, it still is a molten ball.
And this whole period is just a violent, not only was Earth itself a volcanic, molten ball, it began to harden as you get into the late Hadean eon, but we also had stuff falling from the sky and constantly colliding with Earth, and really just continuing to add to the heat of this molten ball.
Anyway, I'll leave you there, and, as you can imagine, at this point there was no, as far as we can tell, there was no life on Earth.
Some people believe that maybe some life could've formed in the late Hadean eon, but for the most part this was just completely inhospitable for any life forming.
I'll leave you there, and where we take up the next video, we'll talk a little bit about the Archean eon.
We're in the British Museum, and we're looking at one of the most important objects in the collection - the Rosetta Stone.
It's in a glass case, surrounded by people who are taking pictures of it.
People love it!
They do.
There [are] gifts in the gift shop about it.
You can get your own little Rosetta Stone.
You can get Rosetta Stone posters.
Exactly.
On a mug.
I think you can get a doormat Rosetta Stone.
Yeah.
But, the stone itself is historically incredibly important.
It allowed us for the first time to be able to understand, to be able to read, to be able to translate hieroglyphics.
Hieroglyphics was the written language of the ancient Egyptians.
And, until the mid-19th century, we really didn't know what it said.
The language itself is pictorial, and actually that led to one of the real confusions.
Because, I think that early archaeologists believed - and linguists believed - that the pictures they could see - (You can make out birds and snakes, and various different kinds of forms.)
- actually referred in some way to a specific thing in the world.
Right, so if you saw a bird, it somehow referred to a bird.
And then, in fact, that's not the case. Right.
This is a far more sophisticated language.
And the Rosetta Stone was really what helped them to understand that Egyptian hieroglyphics are not pictorial.
They're not pictographs.
They're actually phonetic.
So, all those things that look like pictures actually represent sounds.
And that's how they were able to finally figure out - and translate - ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics.
And the reason we were able to do that is because this stone said the same statement three times, in three different languages.
So, the three languages are:
Ancient Greek, which is down at the bottom.
Now, that was the language of the administration.
That was the language of government.
And the reason for that is because
Alexander the Great had conquered Egypt, and had set up this sort of Greek rule in this Hellenistic era - and that maintained itself in ancient Egypt.
Let's remember, we're talking around 200 B.C. here. - which is actually getting close to the end of the life of hieroglyphics, as well.
It would last for another few hundred years before it died out completely.
So, this is really the tail end of this 3000-year-long language.
So, the middle section is Demotic, which actually means "the language of the people."
And it was this common language used by the Egyptians.
And the top, of course, was the sacred writing.
This was hieroglyphs. Right.
And that was the language that we really couldn't read -
- until we had the Rosetta Stone.
And we could see within the writing of the Rosetta Stone, cartouches, which held the names of the rulers.
Cartouches are a kind of oblong shape that contains the name of the ruler.
In this case, that would be Ptolemy the Fifth.
And by recognizing that ruler's name, in these three different languages, we found a way to begin to unlock hieroglyphics.
Now, that would take decades.
It was an incredibly difficult task.
And we haven't even talked yet about how this was found!
Napoleon has his army in Egypt.
And Napoleon's brought with him some - what I guess we would call, sort of - archaeologist types.
And, one of those people who accompanied Napoleon found - or came across - the Rosetta Stone.
It was being used as a part of the foundation of a fort, in fact.
And of course, it would originally have been erected in a temple, or near an ancient Egyptian temple.
And, I suppose it's important to say that this is the bottom portion of a much larger stele - or sort of stone tablet - that would have been quite tall.
So, Napoleon took it back.
Except, hold on a second - because we're not in the Louvre.
We're in London, in the British Museum.
So, how does that work?
Well, the British defeated Napoleon, and brought back the stone.
And a year or two later - I think, 1801 or 1802 - it's brought to the British Museum.
And it's been here ever since.
Well, it's clearly still extremely popular.
I've got a matrix A, and it's an m by n matrix.
It has m rows and n columns.
So I can write it in fairly general terms like this.
The first row would be a11.
First row, first column. a12, First row, second column.
All the way to-- I have n columns.
So a1n, first row, n-th column.
And then the second row would look like this. a second row, first column.
A second row, second column.
All the way to a second row, n column.
And we'll just keep doing that all the way down until you get to the m-th row.
The m row would look like this.
Each of these are the entries in each of the rows or columns, depending on how you want to look at it.
So this is going to be a sub m 1. mth row, first column. a sub m 2.
And you go all the way to a sub m n.
This is our matrix right here.
That is my matrix A.
Now, I'm going to define the transpose of this matrix as A with this superscript T.
And this is going to be my definition, it is essentially the matrix A with all the rows and the columns swapped.
So my matrix A transpose is going to be a n by m matrix.
Notice I said m rows and n columns.
Now this is going to have n rows and m columns.
So what is this guy going to look like?
What is he going to look like?
Well I'm gonna swap my rows and my columns.
So my first row becomes my first column.
So I'm going to have a11.
That entry's still going to be in that position.
But now this entry is not going to be right here. a12.
And my second row I have what I used to have in my second row, first column.
I'm now going to have what I had in my second column, first row.
I'm just going to go down all the way to a1n.
And that makes-- not a i n, a1n.
And that makes sense because I'll now have n columns.
Sorry I now have n rows.
I had n columns before.
Now I have n rows.
Now this row, when I transpose it is going look like this. a21, a22, all the way down to a2n.
It might be a little confusing for you right now to have this notation right there because everything we've done so far.
We've always said, hey this first number's the row and the second number is the column.
That's what we did up here.
What I'm doing here, you can ignore that reference to the rows and columns.
You can just say whatever we had here in my first row, second column, I now have here.
When you look at this transpose, don't take these subscripts too literally.
Or now you can kind of reverse your interpretation.
This is now the first column, second row.
This was the second row, first column.
I don't want you get too confused with these subscripts.
Just keep in mind, we're taking all the rows and turning them into the columns to get the transpose.
And then you just keep doing this.
And then this m-th row will now become the m-th column. am1, am2, all the way down to a m n.
So, this entry is now that entry.
If you know, this entry is now that entry.
That entry is now at that entry.
This is what A transpose is.
And sometimes when you do in the abstract, it can be a little confusing.
And we'll especially appreciate that once we do some of the proofs involving the transpose.
But actually taking the transpose of an actual matrix, with actual numbers, shouldn't be too difficult.
So, let's start with the 2 by 2 case.
I'll try to color code it as best as I can.
So let's say I have the matrix.
Let's say I defined A.
Let's do B now.
I already defined A.
Let's say B.
B is equal to the matrix 1, 2, 3, 4.
Those colors are pretty close.
But what is B transpose going to look like?
B transpose is going to be equal to-- You switch the rows and columns.
So the first row will now become the first column.
1, 2.
And the second row will now become the second column, 3, 4.
Or you could view it the other way.
The first column now became the first row.
And the second column now became the second row.
Let's do an example.
Instead of even doing a 2 by 3-- or a 3 by 3-- let me do one that might be a little bit more challenging.
I think this'll make things clear.
So let's say I have the matrix C.
Let me make it a pretty big matrix.
Let's say it is a 4 by 3 matrix right here.
Let me just throw some numbers in there.
1, 0, minus 1.
2, 7.
Oh I want to do it in different colors.
Let me do that in a different color.
So then I get 2, 7, minus 5.
Then I get 4 minus 3, 2.
I have to do one more row here.
So let me just make that minus 1, 3, and 0.
That is my matrix C.
So what is-- let me do that, and I like to be aesthetically pleasing.
So let me close the bracket in the same color.
So what is C transpose going to be?
So, C transpose.
C transpose is now going to be a 3 by 4 matrix.
And, essentially, it's going to be the matrix C with all the rows swapped for the columns or all the columns swapped for the rows.
So, it's now going to be a 3 by 4 matrix.
And that first row there is now going to become the first column.
The second row here is now going to become the second column.
2, 7, minus 5.
I didn't use the exact same green, but you get the idea.
This third row will become the third column.
4, minus 3, 2.
And then, finally, the fourth row will become the fourth column.
Minus 1, 3, and 0.
All we did is, this guy was in the second row, third column.
Now, that same guy is in the what?
He is in the second column and the third row.
All we did is switch the rows and the columns.
We could do it with another. Let's see.
Let's do it with this one right here.
This guy right here is in the third row.
And the second column.
And when you go down here this guy is now in the third column and the second row.
That's all a transpose is.
And, just as a little interesting thing, what happens if we take the transpose of the transpose?
So what happens if we take C transpose and then transpose that?
What is that going to be equal to?
Well to go from C to C transpose, we switched all the rows and the columns.
All the entries the rows and columns.
When you take the transpose again, remember let's just focus on this guy.
This was second row, third column.
You took the transpose, it becomes second column and third row.
If you were to take the transpose again of that, he would then become the second row and third column again.
So C transpose, the transpose of C transpose, is just equal to C.
You're swapping all the columns when you take the transpose.
And when you take the transpose again, you swap them all back.
That's all that means.
Anyway.
Hope you found that useful.
I've done a bunch of videos already on respiration.
I think even before those videos, you had a sense that we need oxygen and that we release CO2.
And if you watched the videos on respiration, you know that we need the oxygen in order to metabolize our food, in order to turn our food into ATPs that can then drive other types of cellular functions-- or anything that we have to do; move, or breathe, or think, or everything that we have to do.
And that through the process of respiration, we break down those sugars and we release carbon dioxide.
So in this video, what I want to do is take a big step back and think about how we actually get our oxygen into our body and how we release it back out into the atmosphere.
Another way to think about it is how we ventilate ourselves.
How do we get the oxygen in, and how do we get the carbon dioxide out?
And I think any of us could at least start off this video.
It starts off in either our nose or our mouth.
I always have a clogged sinus so I often have to deal with my mouth.
I sleep with my mouth often.
But it always starts in our nose or our mouths.
Let me draw someone with a nose and a mouth.
So let's say that this is my person.
Maybe his mouth will be open so that he can breathe.
His eyes aren't important, but just so you know it's a person.
So this is my test subject or the person I'm going to use to diagram.
That's his ear.
Maybe he has a bit of a-- let's give him some hair.
This is the guy that's going to show us how we take air in and how we take air out of the body.
So let's go inside of this guy.
I can draw his outside first.
Let me see how well I can do this.
So this is outside the guy.
That doesn't look right.
Let's say the guy looks something like this and he's got-- this is his shoulders.
That's our guy. All right.
So in our mouth, we have our oral cavity right there, which is just the space that our mouth creates.
We have our oral cavity.
I could draw our tongue and all of that and maybe I will.
Maybe I'll draw the tongue.
But you have this space inside of the mouth-- call that the oral cavity.
And then also you have your nostrils and they open up into a nasal cavity.
So that's another big space just like this.
And we know that they connect at the back of our nose or the back of our mouth.
And this passage right here where they connect is called the pharynx.
When your air goes through your nose-- they say breathing through your nose is better, probably because it gets filtered by your nose hairs and it gets warmed up and and what not, but you can breathe through either side.
The air goes in through either your nasal cavity or your oral cavity and then comes back through your pharynx and then the pharynx splits into two pipes.
One for-- well, one, air can go down either one, but the other one is for food.
So your pharynx gets split.
In the back you have your esophagus-- and we'll talk more about the esophagus in a future video.
In the back you have your esophagus and in the front-- let me draw a little dividing line there.
In the front, maybe this-- let me make it connect like that.
I was using yellow.
I'm going to use yellow to continue and I'm going to use green for the air.
So it divides just like that.
So behind your air pipe, you have your esophagus.
And then right here is your larynx.
Esophagus is where your food goes down.
We know that we eat food with our mouth as well.
So this is where we want our food to go-- down the esophagus.
But the focus of this video is our ventilation.
What do we do with our air?
So I'm going to focus as the air goes through our larynx.
And the larynx is also our voicebox.
So as you hear me talking right now, there are these little things right about here that are vibrating at just the right frequencies and I'm able to shape the sound with my mouth to make this video.
So that's also your voicebox, but I won't focus on that right now.
It's called a voicebox because of this whole anatomical structure that looks something like that.
But then after the air passes through the larynx-- this is on the way in-- it goes to the trachea, which is essentially just the pipe for air.
The esophagus is the pipe for food.
Let me write this down.
It has cartilage around it and it makes sense that it has cartilage.
You don't want-- you can imagine a hose-- if it bent a
lot, you wouldn't be able to get a lot of water through it, or a lot of air through it.
So you don't want this thing to bend a lot.
So that's why it needs to have some rigidity-- so that's why it has cartilage around it.
And then it splits into two tubes-- and I think you know where these two tubes are going to.
And I'm not drawing this in super detail.
I just want you to get the idea of them, but these two tubes are the bronchi-- or each one is a bronchus.
They keep splitting into smaller and smaller tubes just like that and at some point, they stop having cartilage.
They stop being reasonably rigid, but they keep splitting off.
So I'll just draw them as these little lines.
At some point they become such thin things.
They just keep splitting off.
So the air just keeps splitting off and spread and goes down the different paths.
And when the bronchi no longer have cartilage around them, they're no longer rigid.
The first of those are called-- or actually all the tubes after that point are called bronchioles.
These are bronchioles.
So for example, that we could call a bronchiole.
And there's nothing fancy here.
It's just a pipe that just gets thinner and thinner and thinner.
We've labeled the different parts of the pipes different things, but the idea is, let's take it through our mouth or our nose and we just keep dividing and keep dividing this main division into two different paths that takes us into each of our lungs.
Let me draw this guy's lungs here.
And these bronchi-- or the bronchi split into the lungs-- the bronchioles are in the lungs and eventually the bronchioles terminate.
And this is where it gets interesting.
They keep dividing smaller and smaller, thinner and thinner and thinner, into these little air sacs, just like that.
At the end of every super small bronchiole are these little air sacs-- super small air sacs-- and I'm going to talk about these air sacs in a second.
And these are called alveoli.
Air comes in through a pipe.
The pipe gets thinner and thinner and thinner and they end up at these little air sacs.
And you're saying, well, how does that get the oxygen into my system?
Well, the key here is that these air sacs are super small and have very, very, very thin walls-- or
I guess thin membranes.
So let me zoom in.
So if I were to zoom in on one of these alveoli-- and just to give you an idea, these are super duper duper small.
I've drawn them fairly large here, but each alveoli-- let me draw a little bit bigger.
Let me draw these air sacs.
So you have these air sacs like this.
And then you have a bronchiole that's terminating in that air sac.
Maybe a bronchiole is terminating in another air sac just like that-- another set of air sacs just like that.
Each of these are only 200 to 300 microns in diameter.
So that distance right there-- let me switch colors-- that distance right there is 200 to 300 microns.
And in case you don't know what a micron is, a micron is a millionth of a meter-- or you can view it as a thousandth of a millimeter.
So this is 200 thousandths of a millimeter.
Or you can think of them as-- and this is actually a very easy way to visualize it-- this is about one fifth of a millimeter.
So if I actually try to draw it on the screen-- if you made this full screen, a millimeter is about that far.
Maybe a little farther than that.
Maybe about that far.
So imagine a fifth of that and that's what we're talking about the diameter of one of these things.
And just to put it in the whole scheme relative to cells, the average cell in the human body is about 10 microns.
So this is only about 20 or 30 cells in diameter or relative to the average cell in the human body.
So these have a super thin membrane.
If you view them as balloons, the balloon is very thin-- pretty much one cell thick and they're connected to the bloodflow-- or actually, a better way to think about is that our circulatory system passes right next to each of these things.
So you have blood vessels that come from the heart and they want to be oxygenated.
In general, the blood vessels that don't have oxygen-- and
I'm going to do this in a lot more detail when I make the videos about the heart and our circulation system-- the blood vessels that don't have oxygen-- de-oxygenated blood is a little bit darker.
It looks a little bit purplish.
So I'll draw it as blue.
So these are vessels that are coming from the heart.
So this blood right here has no oxygen in it or it's been de-oxygenated or it has very little oxygen in it.
And the word for the blood vessels that comes from the heart are arteries.
Let me write that down.
I'll review that again when we cover it in the heart.
So arteries are blood vessels from the heart.
Vessels that go to the heart are called veins.
This is really important to keep in mind because later on, you're going to see that arteries don't always carry oxygen or they're always not de-oxygenated and veins always aren't one way or the other.
We're going to go into a lot more detail when we actually cover the heart and the circulatory system, but just remember, arteries go away.
Veins go to the heart.
So here, these are arteries going away from the heart to the lungs, to the alveoli because they want the blood that's traveling in them to get oxygen.
So what's going to happen is that the air is flowing through the bronchioles and circulating around the alveoli, filling the alveoli-- and as they fill the alveoli, the little molecules of oxygen are allowed to cross the membrane of the alveoli and essentially be absorbed into the blood.
I'll do a lot more on that when we talk about hemoglobin and red blood cells, but you just have to realize that there's just a lot of capillaries.
Capillaries are just super small blood vessels that allow air to pass-- essentially oxygen and carbon dioxide molecules to pass between them.
These have a lot of capillaries on them that allow the exchange of gases.
So the oxygen can go into this blood and so once the oxygen-- so this is the vessel that's coming from the heart and then it's just a tube.
So then once it gets the oxygen, it's going to go back to the heart.
And so essentially this is the point where this vessel, this pipe, part of our circulatory system, goes from being an artery-- because it's coming from the heart-- to a vein because it's going back to the heart.
And there's a special word for these arteries and veins.
They're called pulmonary arteries and veins.
So going away from the heart to the lungs, to the alveoli, these are the pulmonary arteries.
And going back to the heart are the pulmonary veins.
Well, pulmo comes from the Latin for the lungs.
It literally means the arteries that are of the lungs or that go to the lungs and the veins that come from the lungs.
So anytime people talk about pulmonary anything, they're talking about our lungs-- or maybe something related to how we breathe.
So it's a good word to know.
So anyway, you have your oxygen coming in through your mouth or your nose, through the pharynx-- it could fill your stomach.
We can blow up our stomach like a balloon, but that doesn't help us actually get oxygen to our blood stream.
But the oxygen will come through our larynx, into our trachea, through the bronchi, eventually in bronchioles, ending up in alveoli and being able to be absorbed into what where the arteries, but then we're going to go back and then essentially oxygenate the blood.
The red blood cells become red once the hemoglobin becomes very red or scarlet once it actually has the oxygen and then we go back.
But at the same time, this isn't just about getting oxygen into our arteries or onto the hemoglobin.
It's also about releasing carbon dioxide.
So these blue arteries coming from the lungs are also going to release carbon dioxide into the alveoli.
And these will be exhaled.
So we have oxygen coming in.
Other things will be coming in, but the O2 is what gets absorbed in the alveoli.
And then when we breathe out, we're going to have carbon dioxide that was in our blood, but then it gets absorbed into the alveoli and they get squeezed out.
I'm going to tell you in a second how it gets squeezed.
It's actually that squeezing out that actually-- when the air goes back out, it can vibrate my vocal cords and it'll allow me to talk, but I'm not going to go into too much detail about that.
So the last thing to consider about this whole pulmonary system or about our lungs is, how does it force the air in and how does it force the air out?
And the way it's done is really kind of like a-- you could imagine it's kind of a pump or a balloon-- is that we have this huge layer of flat muscles.
Let me pick a good color here.
And so when it's relaxed, it kind of has this arch shape, and so the lungs are kind of squeezed in.
They don't have a lot of volume.
But when I essentially breathe in, what's happening is this thoracic diaphragm is contracted and when it's contracted, it gets shorter, but more importantly, it opens up the space where my lungs are.
So my lungs can fill up that space.
So what it does is, it essentially-- it's like pulling a balloon larger, making the volume of my lungs larger.
And when you make the volume of something larger-- so the lungs will become larger as my thoracic diaphragm is contracted and it kind of arches down, creates more space-- and as the volume of something becomes larger, the pressure inside of them goes down.
If you remember from physics, the pressure times volume is a constant.
So when we breathe in, our brain is essentially telling our diaphragm to contract.
Our lungs expand to fill the space.
We have less pressure here than we have outside-- or you can view it as negative pressure.
So air always wants to go from high pressure to low pressure and so air is going to flow into our lungs.
And hopefully there'll be some oxygen there that can then essentially go into our alveoli and end up in our arteries and then go back in the veins as oxygen attached to hemoglobin.
I'll talk more about that in detail.
And then when we stop contracting the diaphragm, it goes back to this arched position.
It contracts.
It's kind of like a rubber band.
It contracts back the lungs and it essentially expels the air back and now that air's going to have a lot more carbon dioxide.
And just to get a sense of-- I can look at my lungs-- I can't look at them, but they don't seem too large.
How do I get enough oxygen in them-- and the key is, is that because of this branching process and the alveoli, the inside surface area of the lungs are actually much larger than you can imagine-- or actually than I could have imagined had someone not told me.
So it actually turns out-- I looked it up-- the internal surface area of your alveoli-- so the total surface area where the oxygen can be absorbed in or the carbon dioxide can be absorbed out from the blood-- it's actually 75 square meters.
That's meters, not feet.
If you think about it, that's like a-- imagine some type of a tarp or a field.
That's almost nine by nine meters.
That's almost 27 by 27 square feet.
That's the size of some people's backyards.
That's how much surface air you have inside of your lungs.
It's all folded up.
That's how it gets jammed into what look like relatively small lungs.
But that's what gives us enough surface area for enough of the air, enough of the oxygen, to cross the alveoli membrane into our blood system and enough of the carbon dioxide to go back in.
And just to have a sense of how many alveoli we had-- I told you that they're very small-- we actually have 300 million in each lung.
In each lung, we have 300 million alveoli.
So anyway, hopefully that gives you a decent sense of how we at least get oxygen into our blood system and carbon dioxide out of it.
In the next video, I'll talk more about our actual circulatory system and how we get the oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body and how do we get the carbon dioxide from the rest of the body into the lungs?
Write the prime factorization of 75.
Write your answer using exponential notation.
So we have a couple of interesting things here.
Prime factorization, and they say exponential notation.
We'll worry about the exponential notation later.
So the first thing we have to worry about is what is even a prime number?
And just as a refresher, a prime number is a number that's only divisible by itself and one, so examples of prime numbers-- let me write some numbers down.
Prime, not prime. Not prime.
So 2 is a prime number.
It's only divisible by 1 and 2.
3 is another prime number.
Now, 4 is not prime, because this is divisible by 1, 2 and 4.
We could keep going.
5, well, 5 is only divisible by 1 and 5, so 5 is prime.
6 is not prime, because it's divisible by 2 and 3.
I think you get the general idea.
You move to 7, 7 is prime.
It's only divisible by 1 and 7.
8 is not prime.
9 you might be tempted to say is prime, but remember, it's also divisible by 3, so 9 is not prime.
Prime is not the same thing as odd numbers.
Then if you move to 10, 10 is also not prime, divisible by 2 and 5.
11, it's only divisible by 1 and 11, so 11 is then a prime number.
And we could keep going on like this.
People have written computer programs looking for the highest prime and all of that.
So now that we know what a prime is, a prime factorization is breaking up a number, like 75, into a product of prime numbers.
So let's try to do that.
So we're going to start with 75, and I'm going to do it using what we call a factorization tree.
So we first try to find just the smallest prime number that will go into 75.
Now, the smallest prime number is 2.
Does 2 go into 75?
Well, 75 is an odd number, or the number in the ones place, this 5, is an odd number.
5 is not divisible by 2, so 2 will not go into 75.
So then we could try 3.
Does 3 go into 75?
Well, 7 plus 5 is 12.
12 is divisible by 3, so 3 will go into it.
So 75 is 3 times something else.
And if you've ever dealt with change, you know that if you have three quarters, you have 75 cents, or if you have 3 times 25, you have 75.
So this is 3 times 25.
And you can multiply this out if you don't believe me.
Multiple out 3 times 25.
Now, is 25 divisible by-- you can give up on 2.
If 75 wasn't divisible by 2, 25's not going to be divisible by 2 either.
But maybe 25 is divisible by 3 again.
So if you take the digits 2 plus 5, you get 7.
7 is not divisible by 3, so 25 will not be divisible by 3.
So we keep moving up:
5.
Is 25 divisible by 5?
Well, sure.
It's 5 times 5.
So 25 is 5 times 5.
And we're done with our prime factorization because now we have all prime numbers here.
So we can write that 75 is 3 times 5 times 5.
So 75 is equal to 3 times 5 times 5.
We can say it's 3 times 25.
25 is 5 times 5.
3 times 25, 25 is 5 times 5.
So this is a prime factorization, but they want us to write our answer using exponential notation.
So that just means, if we have repeated primes, we can write those as an exponent.
So what is 5 times 5?
5 times 5 is 5 multiplied by itself two times.
This is the same thing as 5 to the second power.
So if we want to write our answer using exponential notation, we could say this is equal to 3 times 5 to the second power, which is the same thing as 5 times 5.
In the last video, we got an overview of electrotonic potentials and action potentials and how they essentially can transmit potential differences through a cell or how they can move a potential difference through a cell.
And just as a bit of review, electrotonic is if you have some type of charge disruption-- let's say a sodium gate opens and a bunch of positive ions flow in, that very quickly is going to make things nearby more positive, right?
It's very quickly because the positive charges are going to move away from their positive brethren.
Positives and positives repel each other.
And so if we go some point further off in the cell-- let's say we were looking at that point right here-- the positive charges-- if there's a positive charge here, it's going to want to move in that direction.
If you have a positive charge here, it's going to move in this direction.
So it's going to become more positive very quickly.
So that's what we talk about electrotonic potential.
And the benefit is, it happens very, very quickly.
If we're looking at this point, as soon as these positive charges move in, a positive charge here that's right there is going to want to move there and a positive charge that's here is going to want to move to the right, but not as quickly because the the effect gets diffused, right?
The impact on this charge is less than this charge because it's further away.
And we could think more, we could run computer simulations about it, but I think you get the general idea.
Positive things flow in.
Other positive things want to move away.
That makes any point that's some distance away from that disruption a little bit more positive so it'll affect its voltage almost immediately.
So it's very fast, but the problem is it dissipates with distance.
If we go really far from that-- if we went all the way down here, this guy would have almost no impact from what's happening at this opening of this sodium gate.
So that's its negative.
On the other hand, on the other side of the spectrum, we looked at action potentials.
Action potentials are all about-- you have some stimulus.
In general, it's getting a little bit of a positive charge near a sodium gate.
So normally, we're resting at minus 70 millvolts.
Maybe you have a little bit of a positive charge come, maybe through some type of electrotonic interaction, but that's not enough.
But maybe another one comes by and it gets you to minus 55 millvolts and then the gate opens, sodium floods in, we become much more positive.
Then the sodium gates close.
Potassium gates open.
The potassium wants to flow out of the cell because we're positive in the cell now and there's a lot of potassium on the inside because of the sodium potassium pumps.
So then we go back to negative.
We actually overshoot.
And just in case you want to know, at this point, we're kind of in this refractory period.
And the original gate that just opened and closed-- it's deactivated for a short period of time.
So there's some period of time that another stimulus won't be able to do it, but then our sodium potassium pumps can get us back to normal.
But the whole time that that was happening, as the gate that was to the left got all charged up, as the sodium started flowing in, it's obviously going to make it a little bit more positive to the gate that's directly to the right of it.
So the gate that's to the right of it, its charge is going to go slightly up and then bam, it hits its threshold for firing.
So then that sodium gate opens and the same thing happens a little bit further to the right.
And I could keep doing that, maybe even a little bit further to right.
A gate's potential might look something like that and that's how it travels.
Now the benefit of this is that the signal never loses strength, right?
We can just keep going down the cell like this.
We could do that for millions of miles if we had to.
The negative is that it's slower than electrotonic in that you have to open and close these gates and it also requires energy because you're always having to re-balance the charge potential between the inside and the outside of the cell.
So we need to think about, how could a cell use both of these things to optimize those tradeoffs between signal dissipation and speed?
And this is exactly what the neuron does do.
So let's go back.
Now we're ready to close the loop and actually talk about the neuron.
So when I talked about a neuron getting excited on the dendrite-- if I zoom in on a dendrite-- let's say this is a dendrite's membrane right here.
Let me zoom in on a dendrite.
So that's the dendrite right there.
Let's say that this is a drawing of that point right there.
When I say stimulated, what's happening is, some channel is being triggered, some gate is being opened.
And so let's say that this is a sodium channel and it stimulates-- the stimulus, it could be-- like in our action potential-- it could be voltage gated.
A higher voltage might cause it to happen.
It might be some chemical stimulus from some other terminal end of some other axon.
It could be pressure.
It could be, who knows?
It could be some molecule that stimulates it, but something is making a gate open and maybe it's a sodium gate and so positive charge is going to flood in here.
Positive charge is going to flow into the cell.
We know why it does that.
There's a lot of sodium on the outside.
That's what the sodium potassium pump does.
So positive charge flows into the cell.
So immediately, it's going to have some impact.
If we measure the voltage here, immediately the positive charge here is going to want to travel away and so this point is going to become a little bit more positive.
If we look at this point, it's going to become a little bit more positive, but it's so far away from the original reaction that maybe it doesn't become as positive because the ions are becoming dissipated as we go through the cell.
So as we go right here to our axon hillock, we have more gates.
Let's say that that's a sodium gate.
Let's say that this is a potassium gate.
Let's say that we have another sodium gate.
Doesn't have to be configured this way.
We have another potassium gate right there.
Now if we just had one event here, we're so far away from that event that maybe if we measured the potential at that point, at the axon hillock-- remember, that's the little bulge that turns into the axon.
Let's do that same chart that I had before, where we have membrane potential.
So potential across the membrane.
And then we have time.
So if we look at this point-- let's say we're looking at this point right here, that point and we're comparing it to the outside of the membrane.
So it's starting at minus 70 millivolts.
That's its resting.
And let's say that some event happened out here and electrotonically it's going to increase the potential a little bit because positive charge is going to make its way and they're all going to push each other.
They're all going to get away from each other and this one's going to become slightly positive.
But let's say it only goes to minus 65, nothing happens.
Then your sodium potassium pumps come into effect so nothing really happened.
It didn't trigger the neuron, but let's say that gets stimulated again and let's say there's a couple more that get stimulated and their combined effects-- because all of them are flooding with positive ions now-- their combined effects are enough to get this point to the threshold.
So they're enough to get this point to minus 55.
And we know what's going to happen here.
As soon as this sodium gate gets to minus 55, it's going to open up.
It's going to open up and sodium is going to flood in.
Sodium is going to flood in until we get to positive 40. then it's going to close.
Then the potassium gate's going to open and get us back to where we were before.
We're going to overshoot a little bit and then our sodium potassium pump's going to get back to where we wanted.
That's going to happen there, but as the sodium is floating in into that first gate, this guy's going to become positive here and then this gate, this sodium gate, is going to become triggered.
And this is that action potential idea.
Now, we could just keep going our action potential all the way down the axon because we said the benefit of the electrotonic is that it goes fast, but doesn't cover a lot of distance.
This is a relatively short distance, while the axon is super-long.
So you might say, OK, I see, electrotonic from the dendrite to the axon hillock-- and then we use action potential all the way down the axon.
That would be reasonable because we're not going to lose our signal strength.
We would keep having that domino, that chain reaction going all the way until we get to our terminal end, but the problem there is, it's slow.
I mean, if this is a five foot long axon, I don't want to have a slow signal.
If someone just bit me, I want to move my hand.
If I just touched a stove, I want to move my hand quickly.
I don't want all that signal to take so much time, all these gates to open and close along the whole four or five feet-- of if I'm a dinosaur, move my arm.
It needs to happen quickly.
So what happens is that there's a combination.
The signal is very weak here, right?
It only got us to minus 55, but then when that first sodium gate opens, it creates a huge positive potential that opens the next gate.
So we have a huge positive potential here.
Now the axons have these huge spaces where they're covered up.
They're covered up by these Schwann cells or by these myelin sheaths.
So even if there are gates underneath them, they're useless.
They can't interface with the outside sodiums and potassiums.
So over this distance of the axon, you cannot have a straight-up action potential.
What happened is, your action potential here, it made everything a lot more positive than it would have been had there not been that opening of the gate and now you can have an electrotonic effect again.
So you kind of boosted your signal.
So now this might get to plus 40.
Maybe over here we only get to minus 50, but minus 50, once again is enough to trigger a sodium gate, which then makes everything really positive again.
It boosts the signal.
It makes everything positive again, then your potassium gates, everything, comes out of the cell again.
So everything gets back to normal, but it boosted the signal.
Now electrotonically, this is super positive.
Now the electrotonic effect, if we go some distance down the axon, this'll be less positive, but it'll be just enough to trigger another action potential.
And then that happens again.
So we have this combination of action potentials with electrotonics.
So electrotonic-- this is very fast.
This is a fast interaction.
It happens immediately, but it dissipates as it covers distance.
So we can't have these nodes of Ranvier being super far from each other.
They have to be just far enough so that when one action potential happens, that it's still enough to trigger the next one.
It's not going to boost its potential to plus 40, but as long as it boosts it to minus 55, we're still going to produce a signal to keep moving on.
So this is a really good tradeoff because we get fast, slow, but it boosts the signal.
Fast signal dies down, but it's enough to essentially trigger this guy and then it boosts the signal.
It's slow, but then we travel fast again.
Signal dies, boosts the signal slow, and we keep traveling that way down the axon.
And this is actually called a saltatory conduction.
Let me write this down.
I remember when I first learned this in biology class, they kind of talked about it.
Somehow putting the myelin sheath there just magically made it happen faster and these things just hop from one action potential reaction to another, but that's not what's happening.
You're boosting the signal here with an action potential.
When these gates open, it becomes super positive.
When it becomes super positive here-- from a maybe not so positive trigger becomes super positive, that allows this point to become reasonably positive, enough to trigger the next reaction.
When that triggers, then it becomes super positive, makes this reasonably positive or less negative, it triggers the next one.
So it's a combination of action potentials that boosts the signal.
And electrotonic effects that move the signal, that gives us this saltatory conduction.
So that's actually how neurons are able to make that tradeoff between traveling huge distances, but not losing their signal.
All right, problem 79. What is the domain of the function shown on the graph below? That sounds like fancy word.
And the set of numbers that it maps from is the domain.
And the set of numbers that it maps to is the range.
So if this is the set of numbers of the domain, this is set of numbers of the range, the function tells us how do we get from this number, some place in domain, to that number, some place in the range.
So in general, the domain is all the numbers for which this mapping, or this function, is defined.
And in general, when you plot it on the xy-axis, the domain is all of the x values that you're defined over and the range is all the y values.
So the function is a mapping from x to y.
So let's see where it's defined when x is equal to 4.
It tells us we're mapping from x is equal to 4 to y is equal to negative 1.
So it's defined for x is equal to 4, for x is equal to 5, for x is equal to 2, and it's defined for x is equal to 1.
So it's defined for all of those numbers.
That's the domain.
This function is not defined.
We don't know what happens when x is equal to minus 2.
It's not defined.
It doesn't tell us what y equals here.
So these are the only numbers for which this function is defined.
It tells us that 4 maps to negative 1, that 5 maps to negative 2, that 2 maps to minus 5, and that 1 maps to minus 4.
That's all it tells us.
And this is actually the range.
So let's see, 4, 5, 2, 1.
This is the domain.
That's the set of all numbers for which this function is defined.
This minus 1, 2, 5, and 4.
This is the range right here.
Choice B is the range. All right.
I think we're on the last problem.
This is going to be a lot of cutting and pasting.
I don't know if it's going to fit.
I have to shrink it.
OK, they say which of the following is not a function?
That's fascinating.
OK, I copied it.
And now I have pasted it.
And it did all barely fit on this page.
So which is not a function?
And remember, what I said in the beginning.
I don't have space below here.
Let's think about what a function is and then we could look at the graph.
So a function is a mapping from one set to another.
From set A to set B.
Where A is the domain and B is the range.
And this is important thing to realize about a function.
So if this is set A, and if this is set B, that for any value in set A, it only maps to one value in set B.
You cannot have this.
You can't have one value in set A going to this value and going to another value.
So that would not make it a function.
If we say x is the domain, if this is the set of all values we can put into x, and this all the set of values that can go into y or that can be y, then one value of x can't produce two values of y.
You can have it the other way around.
You could have two different values of x producing the same value of y.
And we'll think about what that is.
That's completely valid.
You could have two numbers.
When x is equal to 2 and x is equal to 7, you can still have y equaling the same thing.
Say this is x is equal to 5.
X is equal to 5 could be y is equal to 7.
Or x is equal to 5 could be y is equal to 8.
We don't know that.
So let's see.
Let's think about how we can visually think about this.
For every value of x, we only have one definition for y.
And people often call that the vertical line test.
At no point on this graph can I draw a vertical line and it intersects it twice.
If a vertical intersects it twice, that means for a given value of x, this function defines two different y's.
Not going to happen.
Now this function does for any given y have two different x's.
Like that point and that point.
That's OK.
That's completely fine.
So for example, when x is equal to minus 1.5 and x is equal to 3, they point to the same number.
As long as one of these doesn't point to two separate numbers.
So that magenta is what that first graph is doing.
Same thing here, for any given y we can have two x's pointing to it.
And they're just fine.
That's completely fine for a function.
Now, we talk about function inverses, well I don't want to get too complicated.
If we do the vertical line test, at no point can we draw vertical line and get, for any given x, two separate y's.
Same thing for here.
Actually here, we have a complete 1:1 mapping.
For any given x, there's one y.
I think here it should be clear, that if I were to draw vertical line, let's say right there, for x is equal to 1, it has two definitions.
Even better, for x is equal to 0, y could be minus 2 or plus 2.
So that's the case that we said.
For x is equal to 0, it's pointing to plus 2 and it's pointing to minus 2.
It's pointing to two different values which you cannot have in a function.
For a function, for any given x, you can only define one y value.
So this relation is not a function.
D.
Next question.
I think this is the last.
It's a page on its own.
Oh, that was the last question.
Did I skip a problem?
See that was 80.
That's it.
We're all done.
All right, see you soon.
In this video we're going to talk about the French, the French Revolution.
And what makes this especially significant is that not only is this independence from a monarchy-controlled empire, like in the American Independence, this is an actual overthrowing of a monarchy, of a monarchy that controls a major world power.
So this is, on some level, depending on how you view it...
The American Revolution came first and kind of put out the principles of self-governance and why do we need kings and all of that.
But the French Revolution was the first time that those type of principles really took foot in Europe and really overthrew a monarchy.
So just to understand kind of the environment in which this began: let's talk about what France was like in 1789, which most people kind of view as the beginning of the Revolution.
One, France was poor.
France-was-poor.
Now, you wouldn't think that France was poor if you looked at Louis XVl, who was King of France,
If you looked at Louis XVI and the clothes he wore.
If you looked at Marie-Antoinette, his wife, they don't look poor.
They lived in the palace of Versailles which is ginormous.
It's this massive palace, it would compare to the greatest palaces in the world.
They were living a lavish lifestyle.
Just in case you want to know where this is, this is what's now almost a suburb of Paris.
But at the time it was a village 20 or 30 kilometers away from Paris.
So they don't seem to be poor.
But the actual government of France is poor.
And when I say poor, they're in debt.
They've just had two major military adventures.
One was the American Revolution.
They played a major part in supporting the revolutionaries.
Because they wanted to stick it to their enemy:
Great Britain.
They wanted their empire to shrink a little bit.
So France sent significant military help and resources.
And you could imagine, that's not a cheap thing when you're doing it across the Atlantic Ocean.
And, even before the American Revolution, the Seven Years' War that ended in 1763, this really drained the amount of wealth that the French government had.
And for those of you who are more American history focused, the Seven Years' War is really the same thing as the French and Indian War.
The French and Indian War was the North American theater of the Seven Years' War.
But the Seven Years' War is the more general term.
Because there was also a conflict going on in Europe simultaneously.
The French and Indian War was just part of that conflict.
And the Seven Years' actually engulfed most of the powers of Europe at the time.
So France had participated in this, ended in 1763, you had the American Revolution.
Both of these really just drained the amount of funds that the government itself had.
At the same time, the French people were starving.
So people: people starving.
There was a generalized famine at the time.
They weren't producing enough grain, people couldn't get their bread to eat.
So you can imagine, when people are starving they're not happy.
And to kind of add insult to injury you would see your royals living like this.
But even worse than the royals, who you don't see every day, you saw your nobility.
Who is roughly a little over 1.5% of the population.
But you saw the nobility really, really, living it up.
And the nobility, just so you know, these are people with fancy titles who inherit land and wealth from generation to generation.
They don't dress too differently from the King.
And they essentially live in smaller versions of the Palace of Versailles.
And if you're a peasant, you work on their fields, do all the work, you send them some of your crops and they pay no taxes.
So from your point of view, and it's not hard to understand why you would think this, these are essentially kind of parasites who are completely ignoring the fact that you are starving and you're paying all the taxes.
You can imagine people weren't too happy about that.
And then to top it all off, you had all of these philosophers hanging around, talking about the Enlightenment.
And this is kind of the whole movement where people, and authors, and poets, and philosophers, are starting to realize that, gee, maybe we don't need kings.
Maybe we don't need priests to tell us what it means to be good or bad.
Maybe people could essentially rule themselves all of a sudden.
And obviously, the biggest proof of the Enlightenment was the American Revolution.
That was kind of the first example of people rising up and saying, we don't need these kings anymore.
We want to govern ourselves.
For the people, by the people.
You also had kind of this philosophical movement going around.
Now if you ask me my opinion of what the biggest thing was,
I think the people starving.
You can never underestimate what people are willing to do when they're actually hungry.
And, this is kind of more from the intellectual point of view.
People said, oh there's Enlightenment movement here.
So this is the state of France.
They had a financial crisis.
So a meeting was called, kind of an emergency meeting of the major groups of France to try to resolve some of these problems.
It's a fiscal crisis, people are starving, what do you do?
So they called the Convocation of the Estates-General.
Let me write that down.
Convocation of the Estates-General
Which was a meeting of the three Estates of France.
Now what are the three Estates of France?
You can really just view them as the three major social classes of France.
The First Estate was the clergy.
The Second Estate is the nobility.
And then the Third Estate is everyone else.
Is everyone else..
In a different color.
Everyone else.
This gives you a sense of how skewed the power structure.
Because people kind of grouped the power as OK: these are the three groups and maybe they can vote against each other.
But this was only 0.5% of the population, this is 1.5% of the population, this was 98% of the population.
But these people had equal weight with these guys.
But these people had the burden of most of the taxes.
These are the people who are doing all the work, producing all of France's wealth, dying in the wars.
But these guys, despite their small population, have more weight than everybody else.
So you had the Convocation of the Estates-General, where representatives of these Three Estates met, at the Palace of Versailles, to essentially figure out what to do about this fiscal crisis.
Now obviously, these people right here, the Third Estate, they were angry.
They were like look, we've taken the burden on ourselves for much of the recent history of France.
We're tired of you guys getting away with not paying taxes and just kind of leeching off of us.
They were afraid that even more of the tax burden was going to be put on them.
And the nobility, or the King, or the clergy, that they wouldn't have to make sacrifices.
So they came in already angry.
And so they really wanted to meet in one big room together.
Because they actually had roughly 600 representatives.
Which only the King at the last minute agreed to.
Before, it was only going to be equal numbers of them.
These guys had 300 roughly.
These guys had 300 as well.
These guys were able to say: hey we're 98% of the population maybe we should have at least 600 representatives.
But even there, they wanted to meet in the same room.
And essentially try to make it so it's one representative, one vote.
But obviously these other Estates, the clergy and the nobility, said no, let's each vote as Estates.
And at the end of the day, these guys lost.
So they were essentially forced to kind of organize independently as a Third Estate.
So that made them even angrier.
So they met at an assembly hall and said: you know what, if these guys are going to ignore us, not only are we going to be in this room and start organizing ourselves.
But we're not going to call this the Convocation of the Estates-General.
We're going to declare that we are the
National Assembly of France.
The National Assembly of France.
That we represent the people.
We are essentially going to become the parliamentary body of France.
Instead of just being this emergency
Convocation of the Estates-General.
And they actually got some sympathy from some elements of the clergy and some elements of the nobility.
Now obviously, Louis XVI was not amused by this whole turn of events.
Here he was, he was an absolute monarch, which means that he held pretty much all of the power to do whatever he saw was fit.
And all of a sudden you had this group of upstarts you know they are taking advantage of this emergency situation where he can't continue to buy as many silk robes as he was before.
They're taking advantage of the situation to declare a National Assembly of France.
To declare somehow that I'm not an absolute monarch.
That my power is going to be taken by this assembly.
So he wasn't happy.
So when they took a break, he locked the door of the assembly room.
So they couldn't get in.
And he said, oh I think there needs to be some repairs in that room.
Maybe you all can assemble later.
And that was kind of his way of saying NO.
If you're declaring you're the National Assembly of France,
I'm not going to even let you assemble.
I'm not even going to let you get in the room.
So that clearly didn't do a lot to make these guys or in particular these guys, any happier.
People are hungry.
These people are living lavishly.
They've already been not allowed to vote in one room together.
When they vote in their own room, and declare themselves as representatives of the people of France, which they really are, the King locks the room, doesn't let them go in.
So they go to an indoor tennis court in Versailles.
This is a picture of it right here.
This is an indoor tennis court.
And that gives you an idea of how lavish Versailles was, that it had an indoor tennis court in the late 1700s.
And they proclaimed the Tennis Court Oath.
Tennis Court Oath.
Where they proclaimed: not are we only the National Assembly of France but even more than that, we all pledge to not stop until we create a constitution of France.
A constitution of France.
So they went from being a National Assembly to essentially morphing into a constituent assembly.
We're going to create a constitution.
Constitution for France.
And they had sympathy from some elements of the clergy and the nobility.
So eventually Louis XVl, he kind of saw the writing on the wall.
He didn't like the..you know.
The people are angry.
And every time he tries to mess with them, they only get angrier.
And they only go to even more extreme measures.
So just to kind of make it seem like he's going along, he says: "ok that's cool, guys.
Whatever you all want to do.
Yeah, maybe I'm open to it, we are in an emergency.
And maybe it is unreasonable,
I have been a little bit unreasonable."
So he lets them be, he lets them assemble again.
But while that's happening, people start to notice that troops are converging on Paris.
Troops converging on Paris.
And they're obviously being sent there by the King.
And not only are they just any troops, a lot of the actual troops even though they are French troops, they're under the authority of France's military.
They're actually foreign troops.
So, if you think about it, these would be the ideal types of troops to put down any type of insurgency, or any type of rebellion.
Or even better, to go in and dissolve the National Assembly.
So people start getting a little bit paranoid, you can imagine.
Now on top of that, Louis XVl's main financial advisor,
Necker, Jacques Necker.
He was sympathetic to the Third Estate, to the plight of the Third Estate.
And he said: "hey Mr. King, I think it's reasonable for you to essentially budget your expenses a little bit better.
And maybe a little bit less of a lavish lifestyle.
Considering the state of the government's budget.
And the state of the people of France, they're starving.
Why don't you do that a little bit?"
But Louis XVl, instead of taking his advice, he fired him.
He fired the financial advisor.
Fired advisor.
So taken together, troops are converging on Paris, you have this Tennis Court Oath,
Louis XVI has fired his advisor, people are going hungry.
They're genuinely going hungry.
People in Paris said: "you know what?
The King is going to try to suppress us again this is no good.
And especially if he does it with troops, we have to arm ourselves."
So they stormed the Bastille.
This right here is a picture of the Bastille.
This is the Bastille.
And this is most famous, when you when you first learn about it or maybe this is the first time you're learning about it.
They put political prisoners there and they freed the political prisoners.
But in reality, there were only seven prisoners in the Bastille.
So it's not like thousands and thousands of political prisoners were being held there and there were freed.
The real value of the Bastille to the revolutionaries, we could say, is that there were weapons there.
There was a major arms cache there.
And so by storming the Bastille and getting the weapons, they all of a sudden could essentially fend off any type of threat that the troops would have.
But this is also kind of the very beginning of the real chaos of the French Revolution.
And as we're going to see over the next several years the chaos only gets worse and worse.
It's almost, on a lot of levels, a lot worse than the American Revolution.
Because what actually happened in the cities and what fellow Frenchman started doing to do each other was really, on many levels, barbaric.
And you actually saw it here for the first time, where the governor of the Bastille, the guy who was in charge of it, he had the standoff between the troops.
And he eventually called for a ceasefire.
Because he's like, oh there's too much bloodshed.
But once the revolutionaries got to him, they stabbed them, they cut his head off, and they put it on a pike.
Then they went back to the Mayor of Paris, they shot him.
So clearly, things were really getting out of hand.
But most people associate the storming of the Bastille as kind of the landmark event of the French Revolution.
Even today, people celebrate Bastille Day.
And that is July 14, 1789.
So just to give you a sense of how quickly all of this happened, the Convocation of the Estates-General that was in May.
The Tennis Court Oath was in June.
And then in July, you have the storming of the Bastille.
And then in August, just to kind of complete the idea that we are definitely in a revolutionary period.
In August, the National Assembly, that started off at the tennis courts with the Third Estate, they declared their equivalent of the Declaration of Independence.
They declared their Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
Which was essentially their version of the Declaration of Independence.
And it essentially put everything into question of what is life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness?
I'm using words from the American Revolution.
But this was their Declaration of Independence.
It wasn't a constitution, it was just a statement of the things that they think need to govern any type of constitution or country.
Or the ideas that any country should be based on.
So I'm going to leave you there.
We've really now started the French Revolution.
And now, you're going to see that over the next several years it's only going to get bloodier and bloodier and even more complex.
And when everything is said and done, it's actually not going to end that well in terms of giving people Liberty.
In the last video, we talked about how the cell uses a sodium potassium pump and ATP to maintain its potential difference between the inside of the cell or the inside of the neuron and the outside-- and in general, the outside is more positive than the inside.
You have a -70 millivolt potential difference from the inside to the outside.
It's minus because the outside is more positive.
Less positive minus more positive, you're going to get a negative number and it's by -70.
Now, I said that this was the foundation for understanding how neurons actually transmit signals.
And to understand that, I'll kind of lay a foundation over that foundation.
I think then just the actual neuron transmission will make a lot of sense.
Even better, it'll make a lot of sense why they even have these myelin sheaths and these nodes of Ranvier and why we have all of these dendrites.
Hopefully it'll all fit together.
So there are two types of ways that kind of a potential can travel.
So there's two types of signal transfer.
I'll just call it signal transfer.
I don't know what the best word for it is.
The first one I'll talk is electrotonic.
It sounds very fancy, but you'll see it's a very simple idea.
And they both have their own positives and negatives in terms of being able to transmit a signal.
We're talking about within the context of in a cell or across a cell membrane.
Let's understand what these mean.
So let me get my membrane of a cell.
Let's say it's a nerve cell or a neuron, just to make it all fit together in this context.
And we know it's more positive on the outside than the inside.
We know that there's a lot of sodium on the outside or a lot more sodium on the outside than on the inside.
There might be a little bit.
And we know there's a lot more potassium on the inside than the outside, but we know generally that the outside is more positive then the inside because our sodium potassium pump will pump out three sodiums for every two potassiums it takes in.
Now in the last video, I told you that there are these things called-- well, we could call them a sodium gate.
A sodium ion gate, right?
These are all ions.
They're charged.
Now let's say that there's some reason, some stimulus--
That right there is my sodium ion gate.
And it's in its closed position, but let's say something causes it to open.
We'll talk maybe in this video or maybe this video and the next about the different things that could cause it to open.
Maybe it's some type of stimulus causes this to open.
Actually, there's a whole bunch of different stimuluses that would cause it to open.
But let's say it opens.
What's going to happen if it opens?
So let's say we open it.
Some stimulus opens-- what's going to happen?
We have more positive on the outside than the inside, so positive things want to move in.
And this is a sodium gate so only sodium can go through it.
So it's kind of a convoluted protein structure that only sodium can make its way through.
And on top of that, we have a lot more sodium on the outside than on the inside.
So the diffusion gradient's going to want to make sodium go through it.
And the fact that sodium's a positive ion, the outside is more positive, they're going to want to run away from that positive environment.
So if you open this, you're just going to have a lot of sodium ions start to flood through.
Let's zoom out.
So let's say that this is my membrane right there.
Let's say that this is my open gate right here and that it's open for some reason and a bunch of sodium is flowing in.
So all of this is becoming much more positive.
Let's say we had a voltmeter right here.
We're measuring the potential difference between the inside of the membrane a and the outside.
Let me do a little chart.
I'm going to do the chart here on my voltmeter.
And this is going to be the potential difference-- or we'll call it the membrane voltage or the voltage difference across the membrane-- and let's say this is time.
Let's say I haven't opened this gate yet.
So it's in its resting state.
Our sodium potassium pumps are working.
Things are leaking back and forth, but it's staying at that minus 70 millivolts.
So that right there is minus 70 millivolts.
Now as soon as this gate that's way down some other part of the cell opens, what's going to happen?
And let's say that's the only thing that's open.
So this, all of a sudden, is going to become more positive.
So positive charges that's already here-- so other positive charges, whether they're sodiums or potassiums, they're going to want to run away from that point because this area hasn't had a flood of positive things.
So it's less positive than this over here.
So maybe we have some potassiums and maybe we have some sodiums.
Everything is going to want to move away from the place where this is opened.
The charge is going to want to move away.
So as soon as this happens, as soon as we open this gate, we're going to have a movement of positive charge in this direction.
So all of a sudden-- this was at minus 70 millivolts.
So more positive charge is coming its way.
Almost immediately, it's going to become less negative or more positive.
The potential difference between this and this is going to become less.
So this is this point over here.
Now if we took this point, if we did the same thing-- if we measured the voltage at this point right here, maybe it was at minus 70 millvolts, maybe a fraction of a minute amount of time later, the positive charge starts affecting it so it becomes more positive, but the effect is diluted, right?
Because these positive charges, they're going to radiate in every direction.
So the effect is diluted.
So the effect on this thing is going to be less.
It's going to become less positive.
So an electrotonic potential-- what happens is at one point in the cell, a gate opens, charge starts flooding in, and it starts affecting the potential at other parts of the cell.
But the positive of it is, it's very fast.
As soon as this happens. further down the cell, it starts becoming more and more positive, but the further you go, the effect gets dissipated with distance.
So if you care about speed, you'd want this electrotonic potential.
As soon as it happens, it'll start affecting the rest of the cell, but if you wanted this potential change to travel over large distances-- for example, let's say if we got all the way to this point of the neuron and we wanted to measure it, it might not have any impact.
Maybe a little bit later, but it's not having any impact because all of this gets diluted by the time it gets-- it's increasing the charge throughout the cell.
So it's a impact far away from the initial place where the gate opened.
It's going to be a lot less.
So it's really not good for operating over distance.
Now let's try to figure out what's going on with an action potential.
And you might understand, this might involve more action.
So let's start off with the same situation.
We have a sodium gate that gets opened by some stimulus.
What I'm going to do-- let me draw two membranes here.
So this is the outside.
And let me draw-- maybe we're dealing with a-- and we'll go in more detail.
Maybe this is an axon or something, but let me-- let's say we have another sodium gate right here.
So they're alternating so then I have another sodium gate.
I think I just have to draw one round of it for you to get what's going on.
Let me draw another potassium gate.
So they're all in the closed position.
Now let's say that this sodium gate gets stimulated.
It gets opened.
It gets stimulated by something to get opened.
We'll talk about the things that-- let's say in particular this thing gets opened-- let's say the stimulus-- it has to be a certain voltage.
And let's say they become open when we are at minus 55 millivolts.
So when we're just in our resting state, the potential difference between the inside of the cell and the outside is minus 70, so it's not going to be open.
It's going to be closed, but if for whatever reason, this becomes positive enough to get to minus 55 millivolts, all of a sudden this thing will be open.
Let's write a couple of other rules that dictate what happens to this gate.
Let's say it closes-- and these are all rough numbers, but the main idea is for you to get the general idea.
Let's say it closes at-- I don't know-- plus 35 millivolts.
And let's say that our potassium gate opens at plus 40 millvolts, just to give an idea of things.
Let's say it closes at-- I don't know-- minus 80 millivolts.
Lets say that, for whatever reason, the voltage here has now become minus 55.
Let me do a chart just like I did down here.
So I want to have space to draw my chart.
And this is time down here.
And let's say we're measuring it-- let's say this is the membrane voltage at-- let's say right by the sodium gate right here.
So we're measuring this voltage across this right here.
So if it's not stimulated any way, we're just here, flatlining at minus 70 millivolts-- and let's say some stimulus, for whatever reason, makes this more positive.
Maybe it's some type of electrotonic effect that's making it more positive here.
Maybe some positive charges are floating by.
So this becomes more positive.
So let's say this becomes more positive and then the ATP pumps-- the sodium potassium pumps pump it out so it doesn't get to the threshold of minus 55, so then nothing will happen, right?
It didn't get to the threshold.
But then let's say there's another electrotonic or maybe a bunch of them and just there's a lot of positive charge here so we get to the minus 55 millvolts.
Remember, when positive charge comes by, we become less negative.
The potential difference becomes less negative.
We get to that minus 55 volts-- this thing opens then, right?
This was closed before.
It was closed when we were just at minus 70.
So let me write here.
So at this point, our sodium gate opens.
Now, what's going to happen when our sodium gate opens?
When that opens-- we've seen this show before-- all the positively charged sodium is going to go down there, both electric gradient and diffusion gradient, and there's going to flood into the cell.
There's so much sodium out there, it's so positive out there, they just want to come in.
So as soon as they hit that threshold, even though this might've only gotten us to minus 55 or maybe minus 50, all of a sudden that gate opens and we have all of this positive charge flooding into the cell.
So the potential difference becomes much, much more positive.
So they keep flooding in, becomes much, much more positive, but as it gets more positive, it closes at plus 35 millvolts.
So let's say that we're dealing here-- let's say that this up here is plus 35 millvolts.
So here it closes and at the same time, that stuff I just deleted-- I set at plus 40 millvolts-- or let's say at plus 35, just for the sake of argument.
Let's say at plus 45 millvolts, our sodium gates open.
So what's happened here?
All of a sudden, we're at plus 35 or maybe plus 40 millivolts so this is-- let's just say plus 40, I think you get the idea either way so we'll say plus 40-- either way.
So at plus 40, this guy's going to close.
No more positive ions are coming in, but now we are at more positive inside, at least locally at this point on the membrane, than we are outside.
And so this gate will open.
So then our sodium gate will open.
K-plus ion gate opens.
Now when that opens, what happens?
We have all of these sodium ions here.
We already saw from the sodium potassium pump that the potassium-- we have all of these potassium ions here.
We saw from the sodium potassium pump that it makes the sodium concentration on the outside higher and the potassium concentration on the inside higher.
And now that we've gotten to this plus 40 millvolt range, we're also now more positive on the inside.
So this opens.
These guys want to escape because there's
less potassium outside.
They want to go down their concentration gradient.
It's also very positive on the inside.
We're at plus 40 millvolts.
So they also want to escape.
So they start escaping the cells.
So positive charges starts exiting the cell from the inside to the outside.
So we become less positive again.
So let me write what happens here.
So at this point, our sodium gate closes and our potassium gate opens.
And then the positive charge starts flooding out of the cell again and maybe it'll overshoot because it's only going to close maybe once we get to minus 80 millvolts.
So maybe our potassium gate closes at minus 80.
And then our sodium potassium pump might get us back to our minus 70 millvolts.
So, this is what's happening just at this point in the cell, just near that first sodium gate.
But what's going to happen in general, right?
As this became very positive-- we went to 40 millivolts over here.
We went to 40 millvolts in this area of the cell.
Because of-- I guess you could almost view it as a short term or very short distance electrotonic potential, this area is going to become more positive, right?
This is going to become more positive.
These positive charges are going to go where it's less positive.
So this is going to become more positive.
This was at minus 70, but it's going to become more positive.
It'll go to minus 65, minus 60, minus 55-- and then bam.
This guy will get triggered again.
Then this guy gets opened.
Sodium floods in through here.
So if you wanted to plot this guy's, the potential difference of what's going on across this, this all happened as soon as-- maybe as soon as a sodium started going in this first dude, the second guy-- he gets triggered here because the second guy a little bit later in time-- because of all this flow a little bit to the left of him, his potential goes up.
He gets triggered, same exact thing happens to him, right?
When the sodium flows in here, becomes really positive around here, that makes the cell around here, the voltage around here, the charge around here a little bit more positive, triggers this next sodium gate to open and then this whole same thing happens, same cycle.
Then the potassium gates open to make it negative again, but by the time that's happened, it's become positive over here to trigger another sodium gate.
So one after another, you have these sodium gates opening and closing, but it's transmitting that information, it's transmitting that potential change.
So what's going on here?
So this is slower and it actually involves energy.
So this was-- the electrotonic was very fast.
This is slow.
An action potential is slower.
I don't want to say it's slow.
It's slower because it has to involve these opening and closing of gates and it also involves energy.
It also requires more energy.
And you're also going to have to keep changing the potential in your cell and you actively have your sodium potassium pumps being very active.
But it's good.
The positive is, it's good at covering distance.
When you have something like this-- we saw with the electrotonic, as we get further and further away from where the stimulus happened, the change in potential becomes more and more dissipated.
It actually exponentially declines.
It becomes more and more dissipated as we get further and further away so it's not good for long distance.
This thing can just continue forever because every time it stimulates the next gate, it's like we're starting all over again and so this gate-- it's going to have a flood of ions come in and those ions are going to make it a little less negative over here.
Then the next gate's going to open.
We're going to have the cycle over and over again.
So this is really good for traveling long distances.
So now we have really the foundation to understand exactly what's happening in a neuron and I'm going to go over that in the next video to show you how electrotonic potentials and action potentials can combine to have a signal travel through a neuron.
They came...
They came with their bulldozers... and they came with their soldiers.
I never left my house and defended it strongly, but they didn't listen to me.
To me it's just like a war zone.
It's like somebody just dropped a bomb here and just boom - dispersed everybody.
Has everyone seen the company's plans?
Our homes do not exist in their plans.
(Don't destroy people's homes!)
Everyone please come look at the thieves stealing people's land!
Mayors come and go, presidents come and go, and the poor continue in the same situation.
They say these mega-projects bring development, we've been to several countries and this development does not exist.
[PEOPLE BEFORE PROFlT]
Forced evictions are when people are forcibly moved from their home, from their land, from their community, from their neighborhood, from their culture, against their will or desire for projects that often have no benefit to the communities that are being evicted.
Forced eviction normally is done by companies, private companies with the assistance of the local authorities or the government.
They evict people from their original place without fair compensation, and using force, using violence.
The groups that lack economic or political power are the ones that would most often be susceptible to forced eviction.
No development can violate human rights.
So we need to question how to balance large projects, or what people believe to be development, with improving the quality of people's lives.
I understand that the duty, obligation, of the government is to develop the country.
But develop the country is not develop the country for the sake, for the benefit of only a small amount of people.
The rich become richer, and the poor become poorer.
How can any project that leads to further impoverishment of the communities, removing them from their livelihood sources, be called development?
The truth is 'development' has become a scary word to many people because in its name many crimes are committed against many people.
Wherever a forced eviction takes place, there's a pattern of violations that we can see very clearly.
Before an eviction, communities often aren't consulted about the projects, they receive no information about what's happening, and there's often intimidation, harassment, threats and even physical violence pressuring these communities to accept the projects.
When they come here, they always say to us:
'If you don't accept this offer, a tractor will come and destroy your home.'
You have not respected our human rights, not as Mexicans, not as citizens, and not as humans.
You've never consulted or asked the community if we agree with being flooded or resettled.
We were hearing from time to time that we would be evicted, but we did not receive any eviction notice.
They came at 7 in the morning and forced us to vacate our houses.
Forget about saving our belongings...
My grandson was still asleep when we were being evicted.
During the eviction, the most repeated pattern is use of force and violence, and violation of all sorts of fundamental and human rights that we can possibly imagine.
Normally the residents are in a state of shock.
Sometimes houses are destroyed with residents' belongings still inside, so besides losing their homes, they lose everything they own.
So it's generally a violent process.
You evict people from the place that they've lived for a long time, and they were brought to another place, far away from the first one.
And the new place, most of the new places have no jobs, no electricity, no running water, no market, no schools for the children, no medical care close by, so it's really very bad for the people.
After a forced eviction, families are often left to fend for themselves, they have no place to go.
When there is a resettlement option it's often inadequate, and the main thing we see with communities that go through forced eviction is that they're left in a worse off condition than they were before the eviction.
The people here were treated like garbage.
There used to be 150 homes and small businesses here.
We didn't get any kind of compensation, small businesses didn't get anything.
We can't go anywhere.
If we move to another place, the same thing will happen.
We will be forced to leave.
Everyone who lives around here:
You should stand up!
(The people united will never be defeated!)
We see a pattern of resistance, through petitions, meetings, negotiations with the government, protests, public demonstrations.
Solidarity is the most important aspect of resistance.
Solidarity with each other and standing up as one, instead of facing forced eviction and staying silent - being victimized.
No matter who has the power in any state, they cannot stand in the way of a large number of people.
For years, all of these actions have helped communities facing forced evictions learn from each other and build upon each other, locally and internationally.
And through this, they've not only claimed but they've also gained a larger stake in deciding what kind of development actually benefits them.
(Stop acts of violence!)
We taught our people about advocacy, human rights, and many other things our community has never done.
A low-income community in Rio de Janeiro presented its own counter-proposal for developing the community in reaction to the threat of forced eviction by the government.
We, the community land owners, took to the streets and to the courts because they want to take our lands and river, and we don't agree with that.
Out of 10 eviction cases that we've challenged to court, we've won them all.
With that, we have gained the dignity of the poor people.
You cannot just come and evict people, you need to follow proper channels of engagement.
There are communities that are not aware that their situation is not theirs alone or specific to their region, but it is a shared situation.
So it's necessary to try to link local situations to the broader and more international issues.
You have South Korean companies investing in India.
You have Indian companies investing in South Africa.
If the nature of that transaction and finance and the people causing these evictions are international in nature, then the campaigns ought to be international in nature.
We are in a globalized world, and we ought to have campaigns that are global.
We have no choice.
States must incorporate a new approach which places the citizens and the communities at the center of decision-making.
People need to come before profits.
Real development should improve the lives of families, and not tear these lives apart.
We must put people's interests before economic interests or large projects.
Who do these projects serve?
Good afternoon.
Earlier today the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act, the name of the health care reform we passed two years ago.
In doing so they've reaffirmed a fundamental principle that here in America, in the wealthiest nation on earth, no illness or accident should lead to any family's financial ruin.
I know there will be a lot of discussion today about the politics of all this, about who won and who lost,
That's how these things tend to be viewed here in Washington.
But that discussion completely misses the point.
Whatever the politics, today's decision was a victory for people all over this country whose lives will be more secure because of this law and the Supreme Court's decision to uphold it.
And because this law has a direct impact on so many Americans I want to take this opportunity to talk about exactly what it means for you.
First, if you're one of the more than 250 million Americans who already have health insurance you will keep your health insurance.
This law will only make it more secure and more affordable.
Insurance companies can no longer impose lifetime limits on the amount of care you receive.
They can no longer discriminate against children with pre-existing conditions.
They can no longer drop your coverage if you get sick.
They can no longer jack up your premiums without reason.
They are required to provide free preventive care like checkups and mammograms, a provision that has already helped 54 million Americans with private insurance.
And by this August nearly 13 million of you will receive a rebate from your insurance company because it spent too much on things like administrative costs and CEO bonuses, and not enough on your healthcare.
There's more.
Because of the Affordable Care Act young adults under the age of 26 are able to stay on their parents' healthcare plans, a provision that has already helped 6 million young Americans.
And because of the Affordable Care Act seniors receive a discount on their prescription drugs, a discount that has already saved more than 5 million seniors on Medicare about 600 dollars each.
All of this is happening because of the Affordable Care Act.
These provisions provide common sense protections for middle class families and they enjoy broad popular support.
And thanks to today's decision all of these benefits and protections will continue for Americans who already have health insurance.
Now if you're one of the 30 million Americans who don't yet have health insurance, starting in 2014 this law will offer you an array of quality affordable private health insurance plans to chose from.
Each state will take the lead in designing their own menu of options.
And if states can come up with even better ways of covering more people at the same quality and cost, this law allows them to do that too.
And I've asked Congress to help speed up that process and give states this flexibility in Year One.
Once states set up these health insurance marketplaces, known as exchanges, insurance companies will no longer be able to discriminate against any American with a pre-existing health condition.
They won't be able to charge you more just because you're a woman.
They won't be able to bill you into bankruptcy.
If you're sick you'll finally have the same chance to get quality affordable healthcare as everyone else.
And if you can't afford the premiums you'll receive a credit that helps pay for it.
Today the Supreme Court also upheld the principle that people who can afford health insurance should take the responsibility to buy health insurance.
This is important for two reasons.
First, when uninsured people who can afford coverage get sick and show up at the Emergency Room for care, the rest of us end up paying for their care in the form of higher premiums.
And second, if you ask insurance companies to cover people with pre-existing conditions but don't require people who can afford it to buy their own insurance some folks might wait until they're sick to buy the care they need which would also drive up everybody else's premiums.
That's why even though I knew it wouldn't be politically popular and resisted the idea when I ran for this office, we ultimately included a provision in the Affordable Care Act that people who can afford to buy health insurance should take the responsibility to do so.
In fact this idea's enjoyed support from members of both parties including the current Republican nominee for President.
Still I know the debate over this law has been divisive.
I respect the very real concerns that millions of Americans have shared.
And I know a lot of coverage through this healthcare debate has focused on what it means politically.
Well, it should be pretty clear by now that I didn't do this because it was good politics.
I did it because I believed it was good for the country.
I did it because I believed it was good for the American people.
You know there's a framed letter that hangs in my office right now.
It was sent to me during the healthcare debate by a woman named Natoma Canfield.
For years and years Natoma did everything right.
She bought health insurance.
She paid her premiums on time.
But 18 years ago Natoma was diagnosed with cancer.
And even though she'd been cancer-free for more than a decade her insurance company kept jacking up her rates year after year.
And despite her desire to keep her coverage, despite her fears that she would get sick again, she had to surrender her health insurance and was forced to hang her fortunes on chance.
I carried Natoma's story with me every day of the fight to pass this law.
It reminded me of all the Americans, all across the country who have had to worry not only about getting sick but about the cost of getting well.
Natoma's well today.
And because of this law there are other Americans, other sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers who will not have to hang their fortunes on chance.
These are the Americans for whom we passed this law.
The highest court in the land has now spoken.
We will continue to implement this law.
And we'll work together to improve on it where we can.
But what we won't do, what the country can't afford to do is refight the political battles of two years ago or go back to the way things were.
With today's announcement it's time for us to move forward.
To implement and where necessary improve on this law.
Now's the time to keep our focus on the most urgent challenge of our time: putting people back to work, paying down our debt, and building an economy where people can have confidence that if they work hard they can get ahead.
But today I'm as confident as ever that when we look back 5 years from now or 10 years from now or 20 years from now we'll be better off because we had the courage to pass this law and keep moving forward.
Thank you.
God bless you.
And God bless America.
What I want to do in this video is revisit some ideas that you've probably taken for granted since the time that you were, like, three or four years old, but hopefully you'll kind of view it in a new light that will help inform us when we think about other types of number systems. So, we have ten digits in our number systems.
Let me just start counting.
So if I have nothing I use the symbol 0.
Then if I have one object
I use the symbol 1.
Actually, let me draw this out.
So nothing, then if I have one thing, I use the symbol 1.
If I have two things, I use the the symbol 2.
If I have three things, I use the symbol 3.
Let me scroll down a little bit so you can see that.
If I have four things, I use this symbol right over here.
If I have five things, I use this symbol.
If I have six things... let's draw it like that... if I have I six things, I use that symbol.
If I have seven things, I use that symbol.
I know this might be getting a little bit tedious, but this all has a point.
If I have eight things, eight things, I use this symbol.
And if I have nine things I use this symbol.
And then if I have ten things... what symbol do I use?
I've already used up my ten digits, we only have ten digits in a base ten
system, so we start reusing them.
So what we do is we reintroduce this idea of number places.
You said that I have one ten and zero ones.
So you say you have one ten and zero ones. ...and then zero ones.
We call this one, we say it's in the ten's place.
This is literally saying one, this is saying one tens, this is one tens plus zero ones.
So that's what this is saying.
But we didn't have to reuse it.
We could have had maybe more symbols.
Maybe this was a symbol, or instead of, or maybe we would've created a new symbol.
Instead of, you know, all of these had their own symbol, so instead of having to reuse the old ones maybe we could've made... the symbol star for ten.
And then when you go to eleven we would have had another symbol for that... let me go to eleven, just to hit the point home.
So... two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven.
So, eleven in our number system, we say that this is one ten... we say this one ten ... let me write it this way... one ten.
And then this is also, it's one ten, and then one one. ... and then one one. So, it's one ten, plus one one.
I know this is kind of strange to see this way, but it represents this number of objects.
If we had a base eleven, or I guess we could say base twelve number system, maybe we would have a symbol for this instead of reusing our old digits. Maybe a symbol could have been something wacky ... maybe it would've been a smiley face.
Who knows what it would've been.
And I'll introduce higher number base systems in, kind of, future videos where we see, kind of, the symbols that are actually used.
But, what I want to do in this video is think about how would we count, or what symbols would we use if we had fewer digits, and in particular, how would we count things if we only had two digits - if we only had zero and one.
Essentially, what we're going to do is think about how we would represent numbers in base two.
Our traditional number system is a base ten number system.
We have ten digits - zero through nine.
How would we count in base two?
So, if you have zero things, you'd still probably say
"hey, I have zero.
I can use the digit zero."
If I have one thing, I can still say
"hey, I have one thing"... because, we have the digits of zero and one.
The digits here, the digits in base two, can be zero or one.
So, if I have one thing, I can still use the number one.
But, now all of a sudden I have these two objects here, and I'm saying that I'm limited... to only these two digits over here.
So, how can I represent it.
Well, instead of having a ten's place, I could create a two's place. ...and I know it might sound a little bit counter-intuitive but I think you'll get used to it a little bit.
So, over here in base ten, we said we had one ten and zero ones.
So in base two, why can't we that we have one two - one two - and zero ones.
So, this right here is saying one two and zero ones.
I want to make sure you understand the analogy here.
In base ten... let me write a larger number in base ten... ...and so if I write the number 256 in base ten... so, this is base ten over here, what does this say?
This is saying two hundreds, so, two times a hundred... or, maybe I should write down the word so I don't confuse the symbols... two hundreds plus five times... or maybe I should I say two hundreds plus five tens... two hundreds, plus five tens, plus six ones.
That's what I represent here, and the way we know that is that we know that if we go two places to the left, this is the hundreds place, this is the tens place, and this is the ones place.
And if you know from your exponents, this is equal to ten times ten.
This right here is equal to ten times itself only once and this is equal to ten times itself, I guess you could call it, zero times.
Or, if you know your exponents, this is ten to the second power, this is ten to the first power place, and this is ten to the zeroth power place.
And if you added another digit here, that would be the thousandths place, which would be ten times ten times ten.
We're going to do the exact same thing in base two but, instead of using ten, we're going to use two.
So, now this is the two's place.
This is the two's place over here.
This is the one's place.
If we add more digits... let me make it clear...
So in base two... let me write a number in base two... remember, in base two I can only use zeros and ones.
So, in base two, maybe I have the number 1010.
So, when you think about it this way, if this was base ten you would call this the ten's place, the hundred's place, and the thousandth's place.
But, this is base two now.
So let me be very clear.
We are only using two digits.
So, in base two this right here is still the one's place now this is going to be the two's place remember, in base ten this was the ten's place, now this is the two's place.
Now this would be, and you can take a guess here hundreds was ten times ten.
When we go two spaces to the left in base two this should be the two times two's place.
Or this is the four's place.
This over here is going to be the eight's place.
So, if you wanted to kind of think about this in terms of base two, this is one, one eight, plus zero fours, plus one twos, plus zero ones.
Plus zero ones.
So, if you wanted to represent this exact same number in base ten, it's one eight, plus one two.
So, in base ten this would be... let me write it over here... in base ten this would be an eight plus a two, which is just a ten
So, this is in base ten.
This is how you'd represent what we know as this many things - as ten things.
This is how you'd represent it in base two.
This is how we know we would represent it in base ten.
Now let's continue here, just to make sure we understand things.
So, this many objects, well, in base two we have one... if you just have two objects - that's one two and zero ones... now three objects would be one two plus one ones.
So, let me do it over here, so this would be one two plus one ones.
So, this is three objects in base two.
Now when you go to this, so over here we have one four... zero twos and zero ones.
So, now we're going to go to the four place.
Because we've essentially maxed out everything.
If we increment more, we have to go to one more place just like we did in base ten, but now we can only use the digits zero and one.
So, now we'll have one four, zero twos, zero ones.
Now when we add one more, we're going to add one more one so, now we have one four, zero twos, and one one. and just to be clear, this is this many things.
This is this many things in base two, this is the four place one four and one one.
If you wanted to convert this into base ten, you'd say look
"this is one four, zero twos, and one one."
So, if you have a four and a one, we would represent that with a symbol 5 in base ten, but we don't have that symbol to us in base two.
Let's go to this.
So, now we're going to increment one more.
So, how can we represent that in base two?
This is definitely, we're going to have one four... and then we're going to have one two... and then we're going to have zero ones.
And if you keep it... it's kind of fun counting in base two, you'll start to get the hang of it.
So, here we'll have to add one one to this so we get one, one, one.
And now when we get to eight, there's no way to kind of increment any of these any higher, so we have to get a new place... we have to go to the eight's place.
This right here, it might look like a thousand to you but it would be a thousand if we were in base ten.
In base two, this is this many objects.
This is eight objects in base two.
When you go... when you increment at one, we'll have this many, we'll have one eight, and then we'll have one one.
So, it'll be 1001.
And then, I'll stop here, at what we consider to be ten objects.... in base two, you would say you have one eight, and you would need one two... so zero fours, one two, and zero ones.
So, this right here is ten in base two.
This is ten in base ten.
Hopefully that doesn't confuse you too much.
Jayda takes 3 hours to deliver 189 newspapers on her paper route.
What is the rate per hour at which she delivers the newspaper?
In this video I want to familiarize ourselves with negative numbers.
And also learn a bit of how do we add and subtract them.
And when you first encounter them, they look like this deep and mysterious thing.
When we first count things, we're counting positive numbers.
What does a negative number even mean?
But when we think about it, you probably have encountered negative numbers in your everyday life.
And let me just give you a few examples.
So before I give the example, the general idea is a negative number is any number less than zero.
Less than zero.
And if that sounds strange and abstract to you, let's just think about it in a couple of different contexts.
If I have... if we're measuring the temperature ... (and it can be in Celsius or Farenheit, but let's just say we're measuring it in Celsius), and so let me draw a little scale that we can measure the temperature on.
So let's say that this is 0 Celsius, that is 1 Celsius, 2 Celsius, 3 Celsius.
Now, let's say it's a pretty chilly day and it's currently 3 Celsius.
And someone who predicts the future tells you that it is going to get 4 colder the next day.
So how cold will it be?
How can you represent that coldness?
Well, if it only got 1 colder it would be at 2, but we know we have to go 4 colder.
If we got 2 colder, we would be at 1.
If we got 3 colder, we would be at 0.
But 3 isn't enough, we have to get 4 colder, so we actually have to go one more below zero.
And that 1 below 0 we call that "negative 1".
And so you can kind of see that the number line, as you go to the right of zero increases in positive values, as you go to the left of zero you're going to have -1, -2, -3.
And you're going to have-depending on how you think about it- you're going to have larger negative numbers.
But I want to make it very clear: -3 is LESS than -1.
There is less heat in the air at -3 than at -1.
It is colder---there is less temperature there.
So let me just make it very clear: -100 is much smaller than -1.
You might look at 100 and you might look at 1 and your gut reaction might be that 100 is much larger than 1.
But when you think about it,
-100 means there is a lack of something.
-100: if it's -100 there is a lack of heat, so there is much less heat here than if we had -1.
Let me give you another example.
Let's say in my bank account today I have $10.
Now, let's say I go out there (because I feel good about my $10), and let's say I go and spend $30.
And, for the sake of argument
let's say I have a very flexible bank, one that lets me spend more money than I have (and these actually exist!).
So I spend $30.
So what's my bank account going to look like?
So let me draw a number line here.
And you may already have an intuitive response:
I will owe the bank some money.
Tomorrow, what is my bank account?
You might immediately say, "if I have $10 and I spend $30, there's $20 that had to come from some place."
And that $20 is coming from the bank.
So I'm going to owe the bank $20.
And so, in my bank account, to show how much I have, I could say $10 - $30 is -$20.
So in my bank account tomorrow, I'm going to have -$20.
So, if I say I have -$20, that means that I owe the bank.
---I don't even have it.
Not only do I have nothing, I owe something.
It's going in reverse.
Here, I have something to spend... if my $10 in my bank account means the bank owes me $10.
I have $10 that I can use to go spend.
Now, all of a sudden I owe the bank.
I've gone the other direction.
If we use a number line here it should hopefully make more sense.
So that is 0.
I'm starting off with $10, and spending $30 means I'm moving 30 spaces to the left.
So if I move 10 spaces to the left--- if I only spend $10 I'll be back at $0.
If I spend another $10, I'll be at -$10.
If I spend another $10 after that, I will be at -$20.
So, each of these distances, I spent $10 I'd be at $0.
Another $10 I'd be at -$10.
Another $10 I would be at -$20.
So this whole distance here is how much I spent.
I spent $30.
So the general idea when you spend or if you subtract, or getting colder, you would move to the left.
The numbers would get smaller.
And we now know they can get even smaller than 0.
They can go to -1, -2---they can even go to -1.5, -1.6.
The more and more negative, the more you lose.
If you're adding, if I go and get my paycheck,
I will move to the right of the number line.
Now, with that out of the way, let's just do a couple more pure math problems.
What it means, if we were to say...
Let's say, 3 - 4.
So once again, this is exactly the situation we did with the temperature.
We're starting with 3 and we're subtracting 4, so we're going to move 4 to the left.
We go 1, 2, 3, 4.
That gets us to -1.
And when you're starting to do this you really understand what a negative number means.
I really encourage you to visualize the number line and really move along it depending on whether you're adding or subtracting.
Let's do a couple more.
Let's say I have 2 - 8 (and we'll think about more ways to do this in future videos), but once again, you just want to do the number line.
You have a 0 here.
We're at (let me draw the spacing a little bit).
We have 0 here...we're at 1... 2.
If we're subtracting 8, that means we're going to move 8 to the left.
So we're going to go 1 to the left, 2 to the left.
So, we've gone 2 to the left to get to 0.
We have to move how many more to the left?
We've already moved 2 to the left, to get to 8, we have to move 6 more to the left.
So we're going to have to move 1-2-3-4-5-6 more to the left.
Well, where is that going to put us?
Well, we were at 0.
This is -1, -2, -3, -4, -5, -6.
So, 2 - 8 is -6.
2-2 would be 0.
When you're subtracting 8 you're subtracting another 6.
So we go to -6, we go 6 below 0.
Let me do one more example.
(and this will be a little less conventional but hopefully it will make sense).
Let us take... (and I'll do this in a new color)...
Let me take -4 - 2.
So we're starting at a negative number and then we're subtracting from that.
Now, if this seems confusing just remember the number line!
So this is 0 right here.
This is -1, -2, -3, -4.
So that's where we're starting.
Now we're going to subtract 2 from -4, so we're going to move 2 to the left.
So if we subtract 1 we'll be at -5.
If we subtract another 1 we are going to be at -6.
So this is -6.
Let's do another interesting thing.
Let's start at -3 ... let's say we have -3.
Instead of subtracting something from that, let's add 2.
So where would this put us on the number line?
So we're starting at -3 and we're adding 2.
So we're going to move to the right.
So you add 1, you become -2
But if you add another 1 (which we have to do), you become -1.
You move 2 to the right.
So, -3 + 2 is -1.
And you can see for yourself, this all fits our traditional notion of adding and subtracting.
If we start at -1 and we subtract 2, we should get -3.
Kind of reverses this thing up here.
-3 +2 gets us there.
And if we start there and we subtract 2 we should get back to -3.
And we see that happens.
If you start at -1, right over here, and you subtract 2, you move 2 to the left.
You get back to -3.
So hopefully this starts to give you a sense of what it means to deal with or add and subtract negative numbers.
But we are going to give a lot more examples in the next video.
And we're actually going to see what it means to subtract a negative number.
All right, we're on problem number 8. They ask us which equation is equivalent 5x-2(7x+1)14x So I'm guessing they just want to simplify this a little bit and see if we get to one of these choices.
This is I think the most obvious thing to simplify. This 2(7x+1) or we can even say -2(7x+1) so then this becomes 5x plus I'm just going to distribute the -2 times all of this.
It's what? -9, right?
-9x-214x
When I was about 16 years old I can remember flipping through channels at home during summer vacation, looking for a movie to watch on HBO -- and how many of you remember "Ferris Bueller's Day Off"?
Oh yeah, great movie, right?
-- Well, I saw Matthew Broderick on the screen, and so I thought,
"Sweet! Ferris Bueller.
I'll watch this!"
It wasn't Ferris Bueller.
And forgive me Matthew Broderick, I know you've done other movies besides Ferris Bueller, but that's how I remember you; you're Ferris.
But you weren't doing Ferris-y things at the time; you were doing gay things at the time.
He was in a movie called "Torch Song Trilogy."
And "Torch Song Trilogy" was based on a play about this drag queen who essentially was looking for love.
Love and respect -- that's what the whole film was about.
And as I'm watching it, I'm realizing that they're talking about me.
Not the drag queen part -- I am not shaving my hair for anyone -- but the gay part.
The finding love and respect, the part about trying to find your place in the world.
So as I'm watching this, I see this powerful scene that brought me to tears, and it stuck with me for the past 25 years.
And there's this quote that the main character, Arnold, tells his mother as they're fighting about who he is and the life that he lives.
"There's one thing more -- there's just one more thing you better understand.
I've taught myself to sew, cook, fix plumbing, build furniture, I can even pat myself on the back when necessary, all so I don't have to ask anyone for anything.
There's nothing I need from anyone except for love and respect, and anyone who can't give me those two things has no place in my life."
I remember that scene like it was yesterday; I was 16, I was in tears, I was in the closet, and I'm looking at these two people, Ferris Bueller and some guy I'd never seen before, fighting for love.
When I finally got to a place in my life where I came out and accepted who I was, and was really quite happy, to tell you the truth, I was happily gay and I guess that's supposed to be right because gay means happy too.
I realized there were a lot of people who weren't as gay as I was -- gay being happy, not gay being attracted to the same sex.
In fact, I heard that there was a lot of hate and a lot of anger and a lot of frustration and a lot of fear about who I was and the gay lifestyle.
Now, I'm sitting here trying to figure out "the gay lifestyle," "the gay lifestyle," and I keep hearing this word over and over and over again: lifestyle, lifestyle, lifestyle.
I've even heard politicians say that the gay lifestyle is a greater threat to civilization than terrorism.
That's when I got scared.
Because I'm thinking, if I'm gay and I'm doing something that's going to destroy civilization, I need to figure out what this stuff is, and I need to stop doing it right now.
(Laughter)
So, I took a look at my life, a hard look at my life, and I saw some things very disturbing.
And I want to begin sharing these evil things that I've been doing with you, starting with my mornings.
I drink coffee.
Not only do I drink coffee, I know other gay people who drink coffee.
I get stuck in traffic -- evil, evil traffic.
Sometimes I get stuck in lines at airports.
I look around, and I go, "My God, look at all these gay people!
We're all trapped in these lines! These long lines trying to get on an airplane!
My God, this lifestyle that I'm living is so freaking evil!"
I clean up.
This is not an actual photograph of my son's room; his is messier.
And because I have a 15-year-old, all I do is cook and cook and cook.
Any parents out there of teenagers?
All we do is cook for these people -- they eat two, three, four dinners a night -- it's ridiculous!
This is the gay lifestyle.
And after I'm done cooking and cleaning and standing in line and getting stuck in traffic, my partner and I, we get together and we decide that we're gonna go and have some wild and crazy fun.
We're usually in bed before we find out who's eliminated on "American Idol."
We have to wake up and find out the next day who's still on because we're too freaking tired to hear who stays on.
This is the super duper evil gay lifestyle.
Run for your heterosexual lives, people.
(Applause)
When my partner, Steve, and I first started dating, he told me this story about penguins.
And I didn't know where he was going with it at first.
He was kind of a little bit nervous when he was sharing it with me, but he told me that when a penguin finds a mate that they want to spend the rest of their life with, they present them with a pebble -- the perfect pebble.
And then he reaches into his pocket, and he brings this out to me.
And I looked at it, and I was like, this is really cool.
And he says, "I want to spend the rest of my life with you."
So I wear this whenever I have to do something that makes me a little nervous, like, I don't know, a TEDx talk.
I wear this when I am apart from him for a long period of time.
And sometimes I just wear it just because.
How many people out there are in love? Anyone in love out there?
You might be gay.
Because I, too, am in love, and apparently that's part of the gay lifestyle that I warned you about.
You may want to tell your spouse.
Who, if they're in love, might be gay as well.
How many of you are single? Any single people out there?
You too might be gay!
Because I know some gay people who are also single.
It's really scary, this gay lifestyle thing; it's super duper evil and there's no end to it!
It goes and goes and engulfs!
It's really quite silly, isn't it?
That's why I'm so happy to finally hear President Obama come out and say (Applause) that he supports -- (Applause) that he supports marriage equality.
It's a wonderful day in our country's history; it's a wonderful day in the globe's history to be able to have an actual sitting president say, enough of this -- first to himself, and then to the rest of the world.
It's wonderful.
But there's something that's been disturbing me since he made that remark just a short time ago.
And that is, apparently, this is just another move by the gay activists that's on the gay agenda.
And I'm disturbed by this because I've been openly gay now for quite some time.
I've been to all of the functions, I've been to fundraisers, I've written about the topic, and I have yet to receive my copy of this gay agenda.
I've paid my dues on time, (Laughter)
I've marched in gay pride flags parades and the whole nine, and I've yet to see a copy of the gay agenda.
It's very, very frustrating, and I was feeling left out, like I wasn't quite gay enough.
But then something wonderful happened: I was out shopping, as I tend to do, and I came across a bootleg copy of the official gay agenda.
And I said to myself, "LZ, for so long, you have been denied this.
When you get in front of this crowd, you're gonna share the news.
You're gonna spread the gay agenda so no one else has to wonder, what exactly is in the gay agenda?
What are these gays up to?
What do they want?"
So, without further ado, I will present to you, ladies and gentlemen -- now be careful, 'cause it's evil -- a copy, the official copy, of the gay agenda.
(Music)
The gay agenda, people!
(Applause)
There it is!
Did you soak it all in?
The gay agenda.
Some of you may be calling it, what, the Constitution of the United States, is that what you call it too?
The U.S. Constitution is the gay agenda.
These gays, people like me, want to be treated like full citizens and it's all written down in plain sight.
I was blown away when I saw it.
I was like, wait, this is the gay agenda?
Why didn't you just call it the Constitution so I knew what you were talking about?
I wouldn't have been so confused; I wouldn't have been so upset.
But there it is.
The gay agenda.
Run for your heterosexual lives.
Did you know that in all the states where there is no shading that people who are gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered can be kicked out of their apartments for being gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered?
That's the only reason that a landlord needs to have them removed, because there's no protection from discrimination of GLBT people.
Did you know in the states where there's no shading that you can be fired for being gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered?
Not based upon the quality of your work, how long you've been there, if you stink, just if you're gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered.
All of which flies in the face of the gay agenda, also known as the U.S. Constitution.
Specifically, this little amendment right here: "No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States."
I'm looking at you, North Carolina.
But you're not looking at the U.S. Constitution.
This is the gay agenda: equality.
Not special rights, but the rights that were already written by these people -- these elitists, if you will.
Educated, well-dressed, (Laughter) some would dare say questionably dressed.
Nonetheless, our forefathers, right?
The people that, we say, knew what they were doing when they wrote the Constitution -- the gay agenda, if you will.
All of that flies in the face of what they did.
That is the reason why I felt it was imperative that I presented you with this copy of the gay agenda.
Because I figured if I made it funny, you wouldn't be as threatened.
I figured if I was a bit irreverent, you wouldn't find it serious.
But when you see the map, and you see our state of Michigan -- it's legal to fire someone for being gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered, that it's legal to remove someone from their home because they're gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered, then you realize that this whole conversation about marriage equality is not about stripping someone's rights away, it's about granting them the rights that [have] already been stated.
And we're just trying to walk in those rights that have already been stated, that we've already agreed upon.
There are people living in fear of losing their jobs so they don't show anyone who they really are right here at home.
This isn't just about North Carolina; all those states that were clear, it's legal.
If I could brag for a second, I have a 15-year-old son from my marriage.
He has a 4.0.
He is starting a new club at school, Policy Debate.
He's a budding track star; he has almost every single record in middle school for every event that he competed in.
He volunteers.
He prays before he eats.
I would like to think, as his father -- and he lives with me primarily -- that I had a little something to do with all of that.
I would like to think that he's a good boy, a respectful young man. I would like to think that
I've proven to be a capable father.
But if I were to go to the state of Michigan today, and try to adopt a young person who is in an orphanage, I would be disqualified for only one reason: because I'm gay.
It doesn't matter what I've already proven, what I can do with my heart.
It's because of what the state of Michigan says that I am that I am disqualified for any sort of adoption.
And that's not just about me, that's about so many other Michiganders, U.S. citizens, who don't understand why what they are is so much more significant than who they are.
This story just keeps playing over and over and over again in our country's history.
There was a time in which, I don't know, people who were black couldn't have the same rights.
People who happened to be women didn't have the same rights, couldn't vote.
There was a point in our history in which, if you were considered disabled, that an employer could just fire you, before the Americans with Disabilities Act.
We keep doing this over and over again.
And so here we are, 2012, gay agenda, gay lifestyle, and I'm not a good dad and people don't deserve to be able to protect their families because of what they are, not who they are.
So when you hear the words "gay lifestyle" and "gay agenda" in the future, I encourage you to do two things:
One, remember the U.S. Constitution, and then two, if you wouldn't mind looking to your left, please. Look to your right.
That person next to you is a brother, is a sister.
And they should be treated with love and respect.
Imagine Alice has an idea, and she wants to share it.
There are so many ways to share an idea.
She could draw a picture, make an engraving, write a song,
send a telegraph, or an email.
But how are these things different?
And more importantly, why are they the same?
This story is about the fundamental particle of all forms of communication.
It begins with a special skill you likely take for granted --
language.
All language allows you to take a thought -- or mental object -- and break it down in a series of conceptual chunks.
These chunks are externalized using a series of signals - or 'symbols.'
Humans express themselves using a variation in sound and physical action - as do chirping birds - and dancing bees - and man-made machines, exchanging a dancing stream of eletrical vibrations.
Even our bodies are built according to instructions stored inside microscopic books - known as 'DNA.'
All are different forms of one thing - 'information.'
In simplest terms, information is what allows one mind to influence another.
It's based on the idea of communication as selection.
Information - no matter the form - can be measured using a fundamental unit - in the same way we can measure the mass of different objects - using a standard measure - such as kilograms or pounds.
This allows us to precisely measure and compare the weight of, say, rocks, water, or wheat - using a scale.
Information, too, can be measured and compared using a measurement called 'entropy.'
Think of it as an information scale.
We intuitively know that a single page from some unknown book has less information than the entire book.
We can describe exactly how much using a unit called the 'bit' - a measure of surprise.
So, no matter how Alice wants to communicate a specific message - hieroglyphics, music, computer code - each would contain the same number of bits, though in different densities.
And a bit is linked to a very simple idea - the answer to a yes-or-no question.
Think of it as the 'language of coins.'
So how is information actually measured?
Does information have a speed limit?
A maximum density?
Information theory holds the exciting answer to these questions.
It's an idea over 3000 years in the making.
But before we can understand this, we must step back - and explore, perhaps, the most powerful invention in human history - the alphabet.
And for this, we return to the cave.
All right, we're on problem 44.
And they said, which is the factored form of 3a squared minus 24ab plus 48b squared?
And if this confuses you with a's and b's instead of an x there, I just like to think of in this case, this looks like an x squared.
So I like to think of it the same way I would think of it in terms of if this was an x squared minus some number times x plus some other number.
So let's put that in the back of your head.
If that's confuses you, don't worry about it.
But the first thing I like to do is try to get rid of the coefficient on the, in this case, the a squared term.
Let's see if we can factor out a number.
Well, sure.
All of these are divisible by 3.
3 is divisible by 3, 24 is divisible by 3 and 48 is divisible by 3.
So we should be able to factor out a 3, so let's do that.
So that is equal to 3 times a squared minus 8ab.
24 divided by 3 is 8 and there's a minus in front of it.
Plus 48 divided by-- 3.
My brain was getting ahead of me.
48 divided by 3 is 16b squared.
Now to factor this we have to think about it as, are there two numbers-- well, think of it.
Let me rewrite this a little bit.
If we view a as kind of the independent variable-- you wouldn't have to do it, but I just wanted you to visualize it properly.
3a squared minus 8b times a plus 16b squared.
So if we viewed a squared as kind of the independent variable or the x term, so now this kind of has the shape of polynomials that hopefully you're used to factoring a little bit.
We just have to think, OK, are there two numbers that add up to minus 8b, and that when I multiply the two numbers, I get 16b squared?
So first all, the number is going to be in terms of b, obviously.
Because if I'm adding them and I get a b and-- I get b's.
And if I square them I get a b squared.
And it also makes me lead to it's the same number, just used twice.
Otherwise, it would be weird to get a squared here.
So the number that should pop out, you say, OK, what two numbers add up to minus 8 and that when I square it is equal to 16?
Minus 4, right?
Minus 4, minus 4 is minus 8.
Minus 4 squared is 16.
So the number we're talking about is minus 4b, right?
Minus 4b. b, that's a b.
Plus minus 4b is equal to minus 8b.
And minus 4b squared is equal to 16b squared.
So we can factor this out to be 3-- let me switch colors.
3 times.
We said minus 4b is the number.
When you add it twice you get minus 8b.
And you square it, you get that.
So it's a minus 4b times a minus 4b.
And that is choice C.
Next problem, 40-- did I skip 45? I did.
Let me copy and paste 45 in here.
Can't skip problems.
45.
Copy and paste it in.
OK.
Maybe over do on top of this one.
Let me see if I can erase this.
Look at that.
All right, now I can paste 45 and we're ready to go.
Which is a factor of x squared minus 11x plus 24?
So there's two ways to do it.
You could just factor this.
Well, that's the easiest way.
Or you could test for 0's.
But we'll just factor.
So if we wanted to say-- well, let me just-- x squared minus 11x plus 24.
So just like the last problem you have to say, what two numbers when I add them equal to minus 11, and when I multiply them, is equal to positive 24?
So first of all, if I'm multiplying them and I get a positive 24, they're either both positive or they're both negative.
Since this is a negative number it tells me that they both have-- I mean they both can't be positive.
You can't add two positive numbers and end up with a negative.
So we're going to deal with two negative numbers.
So essentially, what two negative numbers when I add them equals minus 11 and when I multiplying them equals 24?
And hopefully, 8 and 3 pop out at you.
Because minus 8 plus minus 3 is equal to minus 11.
That's that.
And then minus 8 times minus 3 is positive 24.
So this can be factored as x minus 8 times x minus 3.
And if we look at their choices, they had x minus 3 there.
And of course, don't get this confused.
If they said, solve this equation, right?
This is just an expression.
Now it becomes an equation if we put an equal sign.
Then we would have this equaling 0 and then you could say the roots of this polynomial or the solutions to the equation are what makes this true.
And then the solutions wouldn't be minus 8 and minus 3.
The solutions would be what makes this 0.
So it's be x is equal to 8 would make this 0, or x is equal to 3 would make that 0.
But anyway, I'm going off on a tangent and that's not what they asked you.
But I think that confuses people sometimes.
OK, 46.
Which of the following shows 9t squared plus 12t plus 4 factored completely?
OK, now this is an interesting one because immediately, when
I look at the numbers, there's not one number that I can just factor out of everything.
9, 12, and 4, they don't have any common factors, so I can't just do that simplification.
So we're going to do a little bit more complexity.
But the best way to think about is whatever's on the t squared, this is probably kind of-- this whole expression, if we're trying to factor it into two binomials or into one binomial, this is going to be the first term of that binomial squared.
So we're going to be dealing with something like 3t.
I'm just taking the square root of 9t squared.
3t plus some number.
Let's say plus a.
Times 3t plus b.
And now we can actually just multiply this out and see what happens.
Well first of all, they gave us a multiple choice.
We could just multiply these out and see what happens.
But let's pretend like that they didn't give us choices and we had to do this in a vacuum.
If we did this in a vacuum, we would have to factor it ourselves.
We wouldn't just be able to test their choices.
Let's do that.
So if we multiply this out, we have 3t times 3t is 9t squared.
Then you 3t times b, so it's plus 3bt.
Plus 3at plus ab.
So this simplifies to 9t squared plus.
Now what are we adding? Let's see.
It says 3 times, a plus b, t.
So it'd be 3 times, a plus b, t.
I just added these two terms and I factored out the t and the 3 plus ab.
Well now we can do a little pattern matching, right?
We could say a plus b times 3 is equal to 12.
So a plus b is equal to what? a plus b is equal to 12.
This whole coefficient right here is a 12 up here.
So a plus b, it must be equal to 4.
Because 4 times 3 is equal to 12. a plus b is equal to 4 and we have a times b is also equal to 4.
So the only number that I can think of when I add them I get 4, when I multiply them I get 4 is 2 and 2.
Both of these are 2.
So if I were to factor this completely I get 3t plus 2 squared, essentially.
Because both of these terms are the same thing, and that's choice A.
A faster way frankly, to do this might have just been to multiply this out and say, that's the same thing.
Anyway, next problem.
What is the complete factorization of 32 minus 8z squared?
So let's think about this a little bit.
So the first thing that I like to do once again is to try to factor out any numbers that are just common to all of the terms.
So let me do that.
So 32 minus 8z squared.
8 goes into both of these, right?
So let's factor out an 8.
And actually, let's factor out a negative 8, and I'll show you why did that.
Because I like to put the z squared, I like that one to be positive.
So let's factor out a negative 8.
And so you get a minus 8.
And you didn't have to do that.
You could have just factored an 8.
What's 32 divided by minus 8?
That's minus 4.
And then minus 8z squared divided by minus 8 is just plus z squared.
And so we can rearrange this, so this becomes minus 8, times z squared minus 4.
And now I'll review this because this is an Algebra 1 test, so maybe this isn't obvious to you.
But in general, if you see something like this, a plus b times a minus b-- and this might be a good exercise for you to multiply this out.
But this is equal to a squared minus b squared, because the middle terms cancel out.
And that's a good exercise for you to do.
So this has that same property.
This is a squared minus b squared.
This is a perfect square.
So then this up here can be factored as minus 8 times-- this is a squared minus b squared.
So if we could say a is z and b is 2.
Because then when we would have z squared minus 2 squared, which is 4.
So if a is z, so it's z plus 2 times z minus 2.
This is probably the most common thing you'll see in a lot of factoring examples.
You'll see something that has this pattern, a squared minus b squared, and you should easily be able to recognize it.
You should be able to prove it to yourself as well that this is the same thing as a plus b times a minus b.
Or in this case, z plus 2 times z minus 2.
And that is z minus 2.
So this is interesting.
So I don't see exactly what we wrote.
I have a minus 8, but we want a z plus 2 and z minus 2.
But they don't have that.
But what they do have is this-- let me rewrite it.
They don't have any of it, but maybe they have-- they want the minus to be multiplied by one of these other terms.
So what we could do is we could multiply the minus because multiplication is associative.
It doesn't matter what order you do it in.
So we could rewrite this as 8 times z plus 2 times minus 1 times z minus 2.
And then this becomes 8 times z plus 2.
This isn't minus 1, this is times minus 1.
Times what?
Minus z plus 2.
And now I think that choice is there. Right.
So we can rewrite this as 8 times 2 plus z-- I'm just rearranging it-- times 2 minus z.
And then that is choice B.
And so really, given the choices they gave us, it probably would have been faster to just factor out an 8 from the beginning and not a positive 8.
And you would have immediately gotten to 2 plus z times 2 minus z.
Anyway, I'll see you in the next video.
In which quadrant is the point -7, 7 located?
So let's just review what a quadrant is
A quadrant is each of the four sections of the coordinate plane. and when we talk about the sections we're talking about the sections as divided by the coordinate axis.
So this right here is the x-axis, and this up down axis is the y-axis, and you can see it divides the coordinate plane into four sections.
We call each of these sections quadrants
This one over here where both the x values and y values are positive we call the first quadrant, and we use the roman numeral 1.
Then if we move counterclockwise around the coordinate plane
This quadrant, where the x values are negative and the y values are positive we call the second quadrant.
We call this the second quadrant.
Then we go down here, where both the x values are negative and the y values are negative, we call this the third quadrant.
Once again using roman numerals.
Then finally the quadrant where the x values are positive but the y values are negative, we call this the fourth quadrant.
So let's see which quadrant the point -7, 7 is located.
So there's two ways to think about it, you could just say look: We have a negative x value, our x value is negative, so we're gonna move to the left, we're gonna be on this side.
We're going to be on this of the coordinate plane.
So just by the fact that the x value is negative, we're gonna be in either the second or the third quadrant.
Now we know that the y value is positive, we know that the y value is positive.
So if the x value is negative, and the y value is positive, we're gonna land some place right overe here in the second quadrant.
The other way to think about it is that you can literally just plot this point and see that it falls in the second quadrant, so let's do that.
If x is negative 7, so it's negative 1.
Negative 2.
Negative 3.
Negative 4,
Negative 5.
Negative 6.
Negative 7.
Did I do that right?
One.
Two.
Three.
Four.
Five.
Six.
Seven.
So x is negative 7, and then we have to go up 7, because y is positive 7.
So one. Two.
Three.
Four.
Five.
So the point -7, 7 is right over here.
Clearly lies in the second quadrant.
Find the sum of 15 plus -46 plus 29.
So lets just think about the first part over here
We have 15 plus -46, we will worry about +29 later on.
So lets do 15 plus -46.
We will get a different color.
We will do it orange.
Plus -46.
So we draw a number line here.
Just we can properly visualize what is going on.
That's my number line.
We are starting 15.
Let me put 0 over here and we're starting with 15.
15 could be right over here.
So this is 15.
Let me draw a big fat arrow to signify this is 15 15 has an absolute value of 15.
So the length of this arrow would be 15.
Now, we are adding -46 to that 15, that is the same thing...
This is equaivalent to 15-46, which means we are going to move 46 spots to the left of 15.
Negative sign or minus needs to be the left on the number line.
So we are going to 46 to the left.
So we are starting with 15 and we are going to move 46 to the left.
The length of this arrow right here is going to be 46.
We are moving to the left.
This is the negative 46 we are adding to the 15.
We are going to end up at some point over here.
That point is clearly 0.
We were 15 to the right.
Now we are goig to move 46 to the left.
So we are definitely going to be the left of 0.
So it's definitely going to a negative number.
We can even think about the absolute value of that negative number.
We can just visualize it.
This yellow arrow has the length of 15 and this orange arrow has the length of 46
The blue arrow that I am going about to draw which is the sum of these two is going to be have this length, right over here.
And just visually, how can we figure out the length of the blue part.
If we know the length of this orange part and we know the length of this yellow part.
Well, it's just going to be the difference.
It's just going to be the difference of these two.
So the absolute value of the sum is going to be the difference between this length 46 and 15.
So this is 46...
Let me just figure it out.
46 - 15.
6 - 5 is 1, 4 - 1 is 3.
The length of this is going to be 31. and it's going to be 31 to the left of 0.
This is going to be -31, right over here.
So we know the first part over here is -31 and then to that we are going to add 29.
Let me do that another color.
So what does that mean.
That means we start at -31.
So we are gonna move 29 to the right.
We are adding 29.
So we are gonna to move 29 to the right.
Maybe that is right about there.
The arrow of length 29.
I can draw a cleaner looking arrow than that.
I'll do it right over here actually.
So then we are going to 29 over to the right.
That's the 29 part.
So now this is the positive 29.
So how do we figure out what this is.
So this is going to land us...
So this number, ...
This is 29 right here that we are adding.
This is going to land us right over here on the number line
So how do we figure out that number that is?
Well, once again we can just visualize it and eventually you want to draw a number line and the stuffs.
I think it'll be useful here.
The number we are going to do.
We are starting from -31 and adding 29 to it.
Since we are adding a number less than -31, we are not going to get all the way back to 0.
So we are stilil going to have a negative number
But how to figure out the absolute value of that negative number, it's distance.
Once again, the little white part right there, that white part plus this 29 is going to equal to 31.
If we just think of the absolute value.
If we don't think about the signs, we just think about the length.
Or another way to think about is, 31-29 will give us the length of the white part and of course it's going to be negative.
Because the negative number here is larger than the positive number.
We are adding the two.
So, 31-29, you can borrow and all of that.
But it's clearly just going to equal to 2.
You could say, that's 11, this is 2.
Subtract.
This is equal to 2.
Since it is -31 plus 29, it's going to be a negative 2.
We are still going to stay negative.
We haven't moved far to the right enough to pass 0.
This right here is going to be negative 2.
Or another way to think about is that the length of the white bar, the absolute value is going to be 2.
2 + 29 is 31.
We are operating to left to 0.
So it's negative 31.
This is -2.
Anyway, hopefully you found that useful.
Oh anyway, I would like to make it clear.
So our final answer is negative 2.
I've talked a lot about the importance of hemoglobin in our red blood cells so I thought I would dedicate an entire video to hemoglobin.
One-- because it's important, but also it explains a lot about how the hemoglobin-- or the red blood cells, depending on what level you want to operate-- know, and I have to use know in quotes.
These aren't sentient beings, but how do they know when to pick up the oxygen and when to drop off the oxygen?
So this right here, this is actually a picture of a hemoglobin protein.
That's one of them.
Those are the other two.
We're not going to go into the detail of that, but these look like little curly ribbons.
If you imagine them, they're a bunch of molecules and amino acids and then they're curled around like that.
So this on some level describes its shape.
And in each of those groups or in each of those chains, you have a heme group here in green.
That's where you get the hem in hemoglobin from.
You have four heme groups and the globins are essentially describing the rest of it-- the protein structures, the four peptide chains
Now, this heme group-- this is pretty interesting.
It actually is a porphyrin structure.
And if you watch the video on chlorophyil, you'd remember a porphyrin structure, but at the very center of it, in chlorophyil, we had a magnesium ion, but at the very center of hemoglobin, we have an iron ion and this is where the oxygen binds.
So on this hemoglobin, you have four major binding sites for oxygen.
You have right there, maybe right there, a little bit behind, right there, and right there.
Now why is hemoglobin-- oxygen will bind very well here, but hemoglobin has a several properties that one, make it really good at binding oxygen and then also really good at dumping oxygen when it needs to dump oxygen.
So it exhibits something called cooperative binding.
And this is just the principle that once it binds to one oxygen molecule-- let's say one oxygen molecule binds right there-- it changes the shape in such a way that the other sites are more likely to bind oxygen.
So it just makes it-- one binding makes the other bindings more likely.
That makes it a very good oxygen acceptor, when it's traveling through the pulmonary capillaries and oxygen is diffusing from the alveoli.
That makes it really good at picking up the oxygen, but how does it know when to dump the oxygen?
This is an interesting question.
It doesn't have eyes or some type of GPS system that says, this guy's running right now and so he's generating a lot of carbon dioxide right now in these capillaries and he needs a lot of oxygen in these capillaries surrounding his quadriceps.
I need to deliver oxygen.
It doesn't know it's in the quadraceps.
How does the hemoglobin know to let go of the oxygen there?
And that's a byproduct of what we call allosteric inhibition, which is a very fancy word, but the concept's actually pretty straightforward.
When you talk about allosteric anything-- it's often using the context of enzymes-- you're talking about the idea that things bind to other parts.
Allo means other.
So you're binding to other parts of the protein or the enzyme-- and enzymes are just proteins-- and it affects the ability of the protein or the enzyme to do what it normally does.
So hemoglobin is allosterically inhibited by carbon dioxide and by protons.
So carbon dioxide can bond to other parts of the hemoglobin-- I don't know the exact spots-- and so can protons.
So remember, acidity just means a high concentration of protons.
So if you're in an acidic environment, protons can bond.
Maybe I'll do the protons in this pink color.
Protons-- which are just hydrogen without electrons, right-- protons can bond to certain parts of our protein and it makes it harder for them to hold onto the oxygen.
So when you're in the presence of a lot of carbon dioxide or an acidic environment, this thing is going to let go of its oxygen.
And it just happens to be that that's a really good time to let go of your oxygen.
Let's go back to this guy running.
There's a lot of activity in these cells right here in his quadriceps.
They're releasing a lot of carbon dioxide into the capillaries.
At that point, they're going from arteries into veins and they need a lot of oxygen, which is a great time for the hemoglobin to dump their oxygen.
So it's really good that hemoglobin is allosterically inhibited by carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide joins on certain parts of it.
It starts letting go of its oxygen, that's exactly where in the body the oxygen is needed.
Now you're saying, wait.
What about this acidic environment?
How does this come into play?
Well, it turns out that most of the carbon dioxide is actually disassociated.
It actually disassociates.
It does go into the plasma, but it actually gets turned into carbonic acid.
So I'll just write a little formula right here.
So if you have some CO2 and you mix it with the water-- I mean, most of our blood, the plasma-- it's water.
So you take some carbon dioxide, you mix it with water, and you have it in the presence of an enzyme-- and this enzyme exists in red blood cells.
It's called carbonic anhydrase.
We have H2CO3.
We have three oxygens, two hydrogens, one carbon.
It's called carbonic acid because it gives away hydrogen protons very easily.
Acids disassociate into their conjugate base and hydrogen protons very easily.
So carbonic acid disassociates very easily.
It's an acid, although I'll write in some type of an equilibrium right there.
If any of this notation really confuses you or you want more detail on it, watch some of the chemistry videos on acid disassociation and equilibrium reactions and all of that, but it essentially can give away one of these hydrogens, but just the proton and it keeps the electron of that hydrogen so you're left with a hydrogen proton plus-- well, you gave away one of the hydrogens so you just have one hydrogen.
This is actually a bicarbonate ion.
But it only gave away the proton, kept the electron so you have a minus sign.
So all of the charge adds up to neutral and that's neutral over there.
So if I'm in a capillary of the leg-- let me see if I can draw this.
So let's say I'm in the capillary of my leg.
Let me do a neutral color.
So this is a capillary of my leg.
I've zoomed in just one part of the capillary.
It's always branching off.
And over here, I have a bunch of muscle cells right here that are generating a lot of carbon dioxide and they need oxygen.
Well, what's going to happen?
Well, I have my red blood cells flowing along.
It's actually interesting-- red blood cells-- their diameter's 25% larger than the smallest capillaries.
So essentially they get squeezed as they go through the small capillaries, which a lot of people believe helps them release their contents and maybe some of the oxygen that they have in them.
So you have a red blood cell that's coming in here.
It's being squeezed through this capillary right here.
It has a bunch of hemoglobin-- and when I say a bunch, you might as well know right now, each red blood cell has 270 million hemoglobin proteins.
And if you total up the hemoglobin in the entire body, it's huge because we have 20 to 30 trillion red blood cells.
And each of those 20 to 30 trillion red blood cells have 270 million hemoglobin proteins in them.
So we have a lot of hemoglobin.
So anyway, that was a little bit of a-- so actually, red blood cells make up roughly 25% of all of the cells in our body.
We have about 100 trillion or a little bit more, give or take.
I've never sat down and counted them.
But anyway, we have 270 million hemoglobin particles or proteins in each red blood cell-- explains why the red blood cells had to shed their nucleuses to make space for all those hemoglobins.
They're carrying oxygen.
So right here we're dealing with-- this is an artery, right?
It's coming from the heart.
The red blood cell is going in that direction and then it's going to shed its oxygen and then it's going to become a vein.
Now what's going to happen is you have this carbon dioxide.
You have a high concentration of carbon dioxide in the muscle cell.
It eventually, just by diffusion gradient, ends up-- let me do that same color-- ends up in the blood plasma just like that and some of it can make its way across the membrane into the actual red blood cell.
In the red blood cell, you have this carbonic anhydrase which makes the carbon dioxide disassociate into-- or essentially become carbonic acid, which then can release protons.
Well, those protons, we just learned, can allosterically inhibit the uptake of oxygen by hemoglobin.
So those protons start bonding to different parts and even the carbon dioxide that hasn't been reacted with-- that can also allosterically inhibit the hemoglobin.
So it also bonds to other parts.
And that changes the shape of the hemoglobin protein just enough that it can't hold onto its oxygens that well and it starts letting go.
And just as we said we had cooperative binding, the more oxygens you have on, the better it is at accepting more-- the opposite happens.
When you start letting go of oxygen, it becomes harder to retain the other ones.
So then all of the oxygens let go.
So this, at least in my mind, it's a brilliant, brilliant mechanism because the oxygen gets let go just where it needs to let go.
It doesn't just say, I've left an artery and
I'm now in a vein.
Maybe I've gone through some capillaries right here and I'm going to go back to a vein.
Let me release my oxygen-- because then it would just release the oxygen willy-nilly throughout the body.
This system, by being allosterically inhibited by carbon dioxide and an acidic environment, it allows it to release it where it is most needed, where there's the most carbon dioxide, where respiration is occurring most vigorously.
So it's a fascinating, fascinating scheme.
And just to get a better understanding of it, right here I have this little chart right here that shows the oxygen uptake by hemoglobin or how saturated it can be.
And you might see this in maybe your biology class so it's a good thing to understand.
So right here, we have on the x-axis or the horizontal axis, we have the partial pressure of oxygen.
And if you watched the chemistry lectures on partial pressure, you know that partial pressure just means, how frequently are you being bumped into by oxygen?
Pressure is generated by gases or molecules bumping into you.
It doesn't have to be gas, but just molecules bumping into you.
And then the partial pressure of oxygen is the amount of that that's generated by oxygen molecules bumping into you.
So you can imagine as you go to the right, there's just more and more oxygen around so you're going to get more and more bumped into by oxygen.
So this is just essentially saying, how much oxygen is around as you go to the right axis?
And then the vertical axis tells you, how saturated are your hemoglobin molecules?
This 100% would mean all of the heme groups on all of the hemoglobin molecules or proteins have bound to oxygen.
Zero means that none have.
So when you have an environment with very little oxygen-- and this actually shows the cooperative binding-- so let's say we're just dealing with an environment with very little oxygen.
So once a little bit of oxygen binds, then it makes it even more likely that more and more oxygen will bind.
As soon as a little-- that's why the slope is increasing.
I don't want to go into algebra and calculus here, but as you see, we're kind of flattish, and then the slope increases.
So as we bind to some oxygen, it makes it more likely that we'll bind to more.
And at some point, it's hard for oxygens to bump just right into the right hemoglobin molecules, but you can see that it kind of accelerates right around here.
Now, if we have an acidic environment that has a lot of carbon dioxide so that the hemoglobin is allosterically inhibited, it's not going to be as good at this.
So in an acidic environment, this curve for any level of oxygen partial pressure or any amount of oxygen, we're going to have less bound hemoglobin.
Let me do that in a different color.
So then the curve would look like this.
The saturation curve will look like this.
Maybe there's some carbon dioxide right here.
So the hemoglobin is being allosterically inhibited so it's more likely to dump the oxygen at this point.
So I don't know.
I don't know how exciting you found that, but I find it brilliant because it really is the simplest way for these things to dump their oxygen where needed.
No GPS needed, no robots needed to say, I'm now in the quadriceps and the guy is running.
Let me dump my oxygen.
It just does it naturally because it's a more acidic environment with more carbon dioxide.
It gets inhibited and then the oxygen gets dumped and ready to use for respiration.
We're on problem 14.
And it asks us what is the solution to the inequality x minus 5 is greater than 14?
Well, to do this, this is just like solving any equality or equation.
What we do to one side, we have to do the other side.
And we want to get rid of this minus 5, and the best way to get rid of a minus 5 is to add 5, so lets add 5 to both sides of this equation.
So 5 plus and then a plus 5.
And then a 5 plus a minus 5, that's 0.
That's why we added the 5 in the first place.
So we're just left with an x on that side.
We get x is greater than 14 plus 5, which is 19.
That's choice B.
Problem 15.
The lengths of the sides of a triangle are-- so we have a triangle.
They tell us the lengths of the sides are y, y plus 1, and 7 centimeters.
They also tell us the perimeter is 56 centimeters.
The perimeter is equal to 56 centimeters.
What is the value of y?
So the perimeter of any shape is just the sum of the sides.
So y plus y plus 1 plus 7.
That's the distance around the triangle.
And that is equal to the perimeter, which is equal to 56.
Let's see, we get y plus y is 2y, plus 1 plus 7 is 8, is equal to 56, so you get 2y is equal to what is that?
56.
So if we subtract 8 from both sides of this equation, on the left-hand side, we just get 2y.
On the right-hand side, 56 minus 8, that's 48.
Divide both sides by 2 and you get y is equal to 24.
And that is choice A.
Problem 16.
Now what do they want us to do?
All right, I think this is one I should copy and paste.
Which number serves as a counterexample to the statement below?
So, a counterexample, an example that shows that this isn't always true.
So the statement is all positive integers are divisible by 2 or 3.
So we just have to find a positive integer that is not divisible by 2 or 3, by neither 2 nor 3.
Well, 100 is divisible by 2, right?
So that just verifies or it's just another example of a positive integer that's divisible by one of these two, so it's not choice A.
It's not a counterexample.
57, It's not divisible by 2, but it is divisible by 3.
19 times 3 is 57.
So it's not choice B. 57 is another positive integer that's divisible by 2 or 3.
It's divisible by 3, so it's not that.
30's divisible by both, so that's definitely not a counterexample.
But here we have 25.
It's a positive integer and it is neither divisible by 2 nor 3, so it disproves the statement.
So it is a counterexample.
And so the answer is D.
Problem 17.
Let me copy and paste this one.
Copied it.
Pasted it. All right.
What is the conclusion of the statement in the box below?
OK, they say if x squared is equal to 4.
So if we know that x squared is equal to 4, then we know, and we know this from algebra, we could have solved it, that x is equal to minus 2 or 2.
All right, so what is the conclusion of the statement in the box below?
Oh, OK.
I think I'm reading this too much.
This is the condition and this is the conclusion.
They're saying if this has happened, then we conclude that.
So they're actually just asking us to label it.
This is the conclusion.
Then x is equal to minus 2 or 2.
I don't like that question so much.
My reaction was, OK, if this is the whole statement, what can I conclude from it?
And there's not a lot that I could conclude from it unless they told me that this indeed was true.
But anyway, I don't want to get too complicated.
They're just saying that if this is true, then we can conclude this.
And they're actually just saying what is the conclusion?
So what part of this statement can we label as the conclusion?
Well, that's the conclusion, so that's choice D.
I didn't like that.
That was more meaning of words than math.
But anyway, problem 18.
All right, let me copy and paste this one, too.
You see, now if a student is a high school band member, then the student is a good musician.
So if you're in the high school band, high school band member, then you're going to be a good musician.
That's what this says.
And if you compare this to the last question, that could be confusing.
Because a valid conclusion-- so once again, here they're giving us a statement and they want us to come to some conclusion.
They might have said what is the conclusion of this statement?
And then you would have said, oh, the student is a good musician.
But that's not what they're asking.
They're saying, OK, if this whole thing is a statement, if we know that this whole thing is true, if they're in the high school band, then they're a good musician, which I kind of wrote in shorthand here.
They're asking, OK, if we know that to be true, which of these statements can we conclude from that?
Statement A says, all good musicians are high school band members.
Well, that doesn't tell us that.
It doesn't say that all good musicians-- the good musicians could be this circle and the high school band members would be a subset of it.
High school band, and this could be good musicians.
So right, all high school band members are good musicians, but there could be people out here who are good musicians who aren't high school band members.
So it's not choice A.
A student is a high school band member.
Well, no.
High school band members, they didn't tell us that all of the students are high school band members or the high school band is comprised of all of the students.
The student body might be like this circle.
Some of them might be in the high school band.
Some of them aren't and are good musicians.
Some of them aren't and aren't good musicians.
So, I mean, you don't know whether someone is a high school band member just by being a student.
All students are good musicians.
Once again, you know, this could be an example.
There could be people out here who are students, the yellow could be students.
There could be people who are students who aren't good musicians.
This statement doesn't in any way constrain that.
So let's get rid of that.
All high school band members are good musicians.
Well, let's look at this Venn diagram.
I mean, that's almost like a restating of what they already told us.
All high school band members have to be good musicians because they told us, if you're in the high school band, then you're a good musician.
So it's almost like repeating the same statement twice, but the answer is D.
Problem 19.
Let me erase this one.
This looks like another one that I'm going to have to copy and paste.
OK, copied it.
OK, let me do a dark color.
The chart below shows an expression evaluated for four different values of x.
When x is equal to 1, x squared plus x plus 5, right.
1 plus 1 plus 5 is 7.
When x is equal to 2, then 2 squared plus 2 plus 5 is 11.
Fair enough.
Josiah or Hosiah, I don't know how to pronounce that, concluded that for all positive values of x, x squared plus x plus 5 produces a prime number.
Which value of x serves as a counterexample to prove
Josiah's conclusion false?
So a counterexamples says-- he says that whenever I put any positive number here, I get a prime number here.
We have to say which one proves him false?
If you put 5 there, what is-- 5 squared is 25 plus 5 plus 5, and what is that equal to?
That's equal to 35.
So that's a counterexample right there.
If x is equal to 5, I produce 35, which is not a prime number, not prime.
So clearly, his statement, his conclusion, was incorrect, that when you put a positive number here, it doesn't always produce a prime number.
That was his conclusion.
This one isn't prime.
So statement A is a counterexample, or the number 5 is a counterexample here.
Next problem, problem 20.
OK, this is one of those where we have to pinpoint the incorrect step.
John's solution to an equation is given below.
For which step of real numbers did-- oh, which property of real numbers did John use for step 2?
OK, so we don't even have to look at step 1.
We just have to say, OK, how did he get from there to there?
So when you look at this, when you say x plus 2 times x plus 3 is equal to 0, you're saying some number x plus 2 times some other number x plus 3 is equal to 0.
So that's like saying some number times some other number is equal to 0.
So that means that one of those numbers or both of them have to be equal to zero, right?
Because the only way to get zero is if one of these or both of these have to be equal to zero.
And that's where he gets this conclusion that either x plus 2 has to be 0 or x plus 3 is 0.
They're both zero.
So let's see how they-- what do they call it?
Multiplication property of equality.
I don't even know what that means.
Zero property of multiplication?
This seems like the closest one for me so far.
That anything times zero is zero Or for two things to be multiplied to equal zero, at least one of them has to be zero.
And that's what this is right here.
Commutative property of multiplication?
No, that's not it.
Distributive property of multiplication over addition?
No, we're not doing anything like that.
If we went from this step to that step where we're multiplying it, that might have been, because you're really just doing the distributive property, but I don't want to confuse you.
Yeah, we're just saying that if two numbers when you multiply them equal zero, one of them have to be equal to zero.
And I guess the label for that is the zero product property of multiplication.
Anyway, see you in the next video.
In this video I wanna give you the basics of Trigonometry.
It's sounds like a very complicated topic but you're gonna see this is just the study of the ratios of sides of Triangles.
The "Trig" part of "Trigonometry" literally means
Triangle and the "metry" part literally means
Measure.
So let me just give you some examples here.
I think it'll make everything pretty clear.
So let me draw some right triangles, let me just draw one right triangle.
So this is a right triangle.
When I say it's a right triangle, it's because one of the angles here is 90 degrees.
This right here is a right angle.
It is equal to 90 degrees.
And we will talk about other ways to show the magnitude of angles in future videos.
So we have a 90 degree angle.
It's a right triangle, let me put some
lengths to the sides here.
So this side over here is maybe 3.
This height right over there is 3.
Maybe the base of the triangle right over here is 4. and then the hypotenuse of the triangle over here is 5.
You only have a hypotenuse when you have a right triangle.
It is the side opposite the right angle and it is the longest side of a right triangle.
So that right there is the hypotenuse.
You've probably learned that already from geometry.
And you can verify that this right triangle - the sides work out - we know from the Pythagorean theorem, that 3 squared plus 4 squared, has got to be equal to the length of the longest side, the length of the hypotenuse squared is equal to 5 squared so you can verify that this works out that this satisfies the Pythagorean theorem.
Now with that out of the way let's learn a little bit of Trigonometry.
The core functions of trigonometry, we're going to learn a little more about what these functions mean.
There is the sine, the sine function.
There is the cosine function, and there is the tangent function.
And you write sin, or S-I-N, C-O-S, and "tan" for short.
And these really just specify, for any angle in this triangle, it will specify the ratios of certain sides.
So let me just write something out.
This is really something of a mnemonic here, so something just to help you remember the definitions of these functions, but I'm going to write down something called "soh cah toa", you'll be amazed how far this mnemonic will take you in trigonometry.
We have "soh cah toa", and what this tells us is;
"soh" tells us that "sine" is equal to opposite over hypotenuse.
It's telling us.
And this won't make a lot of sense just now,
I'll do it in a little more detail in a second.
And then cosine is equal to adjacent over hypotenuse.
And then you finally have tangent, tangent is equal to opposite over adjacent.
So you're probably saying, "hey, Sal, what is all this "opposite"
"hypotenuse", "adjacent", what are we talking about?"
Well, let's take an angle here.
Let's say that this angle right over here is theta, between the side of the length 4, and the side of length 5. This is theta.
So lets figure out the sine of theta, the cosine of theta, and what the tangent of theta are.
So if we first want to focus on the sine of theta, we just have to remember "soh cah toa", sine is opposit over hypotonuse, so sine of theta is equal to the opposite - so what is the opposite side to the angle?
So this is our angle right here, the opposite side, if we just go to the opposite side, not one of the sides that are kind of adjacent to the angle, the opposite side is the 3, if you're just kinda - it's opening on to that 3, so the opposite side is 3.
And then what is the hypotenuse?
Well, we already know - the hypotenuse here is 5.
So it's 3 over 5.
The sine of theta is 3/5.
And I'm going to show you in a second, that the sine of theta - if this angle is a certain angle - it's always going to be 3/5.
The ratio of the opposite to the hypotenuse is always going to be the same, even if the actual triangle were a larger triangle or a smaller one.
So I'll show you that in a second.
So let's go throught all of the trig functions.
Let's think about what the cosine of theta is.
Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, so remember -
let me label them.
We already figured out that the 3 was the opposite side.
This is the opposite side.
And only when we're talking about this angle.
When we're talking about this angle - this side is opposite to it.
When we're talking about this angle, this 4 side is adjacent to it, it's one of the sides that kind of make up - that kind of form the vertex here.
So this right here is the adjacent side.
And I want to be very clear, this only applies to this angle.
If we're talking about that angle, then this green side would be opposite, and this yellow side would be adjacent.
But we're just focusing on this angle right over here.
So cosine of this angle - so the adjacent side of this angle is 4, so the adjacent over the hypotenuse, the adjacent, which is 4, over the hypotenuse, 4 over 5.
Now let's do the tangent.
Let's do the tangent.
The tangent of theta: opposite over adjacent.
The opposite side is 3.
What is the adjacent side?
We've already figured that out, the adjacent side is 4.
So knwoing the sides of this right triangle, we were able to figure out the major trig ratios.
And we'll see that there are other trig ratios, but they can all be derived from these three basic trig functions.
Now, let's think about another angle in this triangle, and I'll re-draw it, because my triangle is getting a little bit messy.
So I'll re-draw the exact same triangle.
The exact same triangle.
And, once again, the lengths of this triangle are - we have length 4 there, we have length 3 there, we have length 5 there.
In the last example we used this theta.
But let's do another angle, let's do another angle up here, and let's call this angle - I don't know, I'll think of something, a random Greek letter.
So let's say it's psi.
It's, I know, a little bit bizarre.
Theta is what you normally use, but since I've already used theta, let's use psi.
Or actually - let me simplify it,
let me call this angle x.
Let's call that angle x.
So let's figure out the trig functions for that angle x.
So we have sine of x, is going to be equal to what?
Well sine is opposite over hypotenuse.
So what side is opposite to x?
4 was adjacent to this theta, but it's opposite to x.
So in this context, this is now the opposite, this is now the opposite side.
Remember:
So it's going to be 4 over - now what's the hypotenuse?
Well, the hypotenuse is going to be the same regardless of which angle you pick, so the hypotenuse is now going to be 5, so it's 4/5.
Now let's do another one; what is the cosine of x?
So cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse.
What side is adjacent to x, that's not the hypotenuse?
You have the hypotenuse here.
Well the 3 side, it's one of the sides that forms the vertex that x is at, that's not the hypotenuse, so this is the adjacent side.
That is the adjacent.
So it's 3 over the hypotenuse, the hypotenuse is 5.
And then finally, the tangent.
We want to figure out the tangent of x.
Tangent is opposite over adjacent,
"soh cah toa", tangent is opposite over adjacent, opposite over adjacent.
The opposite side is 4.
I want to do it in that blue color.
The opposite side is 4, and the adjacent side is 3.
And we're done!
And in the next video I'll do a ton of more examples of this, just so that we really get a feel for it.
But I'll leave you thinking of what happens when these angle start to approach 90 degrees, or how could they even get larger than 90 degrees.
And we'll see that this definition, the "soh cah toa" definition takes us a long way for angles that are between 0 and 90 degrees, or that are less than 90 degrees.
But they kind of start to mess up really at the boundries.
And we're going to introduce a new definition, that's kind of derived from the "soh cah toa" definition for finding the sine, cosine and tangent of really any angle.
We could have a debate about what the most interesting cell in the human body is, but I think easily the neuron would make the top five, and it's not just because the cell itself is interesting.
The fact that it essentially makes up our brain and our nervous system and is responsible for the thoughts and our feelings and maybe for all of our sentience, I think, would easily make it the top one or two cells.
So what I want to do is first to show you what a neuron looks like.
And, of course, this is kind of the perfect example.
This isn't what all neurons look like.
And then we're going to talk a little bit about how it performs its function, which is essentially communication, essentially transmitting signals across its length, depending on the signals it receives.
So if I were to draw a neuron-- let me pick a better color.
It looks something like this.
So in the middle you have your soma and then from the soma-- let me draw the nucleus.
This is a nucleus, just like any cell's nucleus.
And then the soma's considered the body of the neuron and then the neuron has these little things sticking out from it that keep branching off.
Maybe they look something like this.
I don't want to spend too much time just drawing the neuron, but you've probably seen drawings like this before.
And these branches off of the soma of the neuron, off of its body, these are called dendrites.
They can keep splitting off like that.
I want to do a fairly reasonable drawing so I'll spend a little time doing that.
And these tend to be-- and nothing is always the case in biology.
Sometimes different parts of different cells perform other functions, but these tend to be where the neuron receives its signal.
And we'll talk more about what it means to receive and transmit a signal in this video and probably in the next few.
So this is where it receives the signal.
So this is the dendrite.
This right here is the soma.
Soma means body.
This is the body of the neuron.
And then we have kind of a-- you can almost view it as a tail of the neuron.
It's called the axon.
A neuron can be a reasonably normal sized cell, although there is a huge range, but the axons can be quite long.
They could be short.
Sometimes in the brain you might have very small axons, but you might have axons that go down the spinal column or that go along one of your limbs-- or if you're talking about one of a dinosaur's limbs.
So the axon can actually stretch several feet.
Not all neurons' axons are several feet, but they could be.
And this is really where a lot of the distance of the signal gets traveled.
Let me draw the axon.
So the axon will look something like this.
And at the end, it ends at the axon terminal where it can connect to other dendrites or maybe to other types of tissue or muscle if the point of this neuron is to tell a muscle to do something.
So at the end of the axon, you have the axon terminal right there.
I'll do my best to draw it like that.
Let me label it.
So this is the axon.
This is the axon terminal.
And you'll sometimes hear the word-- the point at which the soma or the body of the neuron connects to the axon is as often referred to as the axon hillock-- maybe you can kind of view it as kind of a lump.
It starts to form the axon.
And then we're going to talk about how the impulses travel.
And a huge part in what allows them to travel efficiently are these insulating cells around the axon.
We're going to talk about this in detail and how they actually work, but it's good just to have the anatomical structure first.
So these are called Schwann cells and they're covering-- they make up the myelin sheath.
So this covering, this insulation, at different intervals around the axon, this is called the myelin sheath.
So Schwann cells make up the myelin sheath.
I'll do one more just like that.
And then these little spaces between the myelin sheath-- just so we have all of the terminology from-- so we know the entire anatomy of the neuron-- these are called the nodes of Ranvier.
I guess they're named after Ranvier.
Maybe he was the guy who looked and saw they had these little slots here where you don't have myelin sheath.
So these are the nodes of Ranvier.
So the general idea, as I mentioned, is that you get a signal here.
We're going to talk more about what the signal means-- and then that signal gets-- actually, the signals can be summed, so you might have one little signal right there, another signal right there, and then you'll have maybe a
larger signal there and there-- and that the combined effects of these signals get summed up and they travel to the hillock and if they're a large enough, they're going to trigger an action potential on the axon, which will cause a signal to travel down the balance of the axon and then over here it might be connected via synapses to other dendrites or muscles.
And we'll talk more about synapses and those might help trigger other things.
So you're saying, what's triggering these things here?
Well, this could be the terminal end of other neurons' axons, like in the brain.
This could be some type of sensory neuron.
This could be on a taste bud someplace, so a salt molecule somehow can trigger it or a sugar molecule-- or this might be some type of sensor.
It could be a whole bunch of different things and we'll talk more about the different types of neurons.
In the last video on the lungs or the gas exchange in our bodies or on the pulmonary system, we left off with the alveolar sacs.
Let me draw one right here.
So we have these alveolar sacs that I talked about and they're in these little clumps like this.
Let me draw a couple of them just so you get the idea.
And if you remember from the last video, these are kind of where air goes in through our trachea, then that splits up into our bronchi, and then those split into the bronchioles, and the bronchioles terminate at these alveoli.
So that's the alveoli.
These are these super-small sacs that we talked about in the last video on the pulmonary system.
You might want to watch that video if none of this sounds familiar.
And then of course we have our bronchiole that feeds into this, and then that might have branched off from another one that feeds into another set of alveolar sacs, but I don't want to get too focused on that.
I covered that in the last video.
In the last video, we saw that air, when we breathe in, when our diaphragm contracts and makes our lungs expand and fill up that space, air comes in.
Air comes in and that air that comes in is going to be-- as we're breathing atmospheric air-- it's going to be 21% oxygen and it's going to be 78% nitrogen.
And actually, in our atmosphere, carbon dioxide is actually almost a trace gas.
It's less than 1%.
So any time you breathe in on Earth, this is what you're going to get.
And we said in the last video that you have these capillaries, these pulmonary capillaries that are running all along the side of these alveoli.
So let me draw those pulmonary capillaries-- and so when they are de-oxygenated-- so they come here to be oxygenated.
So when they're de-oxygenated, they might look a little purplish.
And then they pick up the oxygen from inside the alveoli-- or the oxygen diffuses across the membrane of the alveoli, into these capillaries, into these super small tubes.
And then once they do, that makes the blood red.
I'm going to talk in a little bit about why it becomes red.
So then it becomes red, and now that the blood is red, it has its oxygen.
The whole point is to get the oxygen.
It's ready to go back to the heart.
So that's just one little part of it.
And we learned in the last video that something that goes away from the heart-- so this is going away from the heart-- that is an artery. "A" for "way". Artery.
And something that's going towards the heart is a vein.
So this right here is a vein.
Now one question-- and this actually came up in the last video.
Someone asked-- which I think is a very good question-- is, gee, when we breathe in, most of the air is nitrogen.
Only 21% is oxygen.
What happens to all that nitrogen there?
How come that doesn't go into our blood?
And that's actually an excellent question.
So to answer that, I think that actually helps explain what's going on here.
Let's draw a little bit bigger.
This is the inside of of an alveolus.
This is its membrane right here, super thin, almost one cell thick.
And then you have a capillary running right next to it.
Let me do that in a neutral color.
So you have a capillary that's maybe running right along the surface.
And this is porous to gases like oxygen, and nitrogen, carbon dioxide.
And what we have here-- let's say that this is-- so the heart is over here.
So this is blood coming from the heart and then this is going to go back to the heart.
Well, the heart's on both sides.
So let me write it this way.
From the heart and to the heart.
And what you have here is-- when we're coming from the heart, this is de-oxygenated blood and it's actually going to have a high concentration of carbon dioxide.
I already did nitrogen as green.
Let me do carbon dioxide as orange.
There's a lot of carbon dioxide and actually carbon dioxide actually gets diffused in the blood.
It actually is carried in the plasma of the blood.
It's not carried by red blood cells that we're going to talk about in a second.
So that's a bunch of carbon dioxide here.
And the concentration of carbon dioxide in the de-oxygenated blood is going to be higher than the concentration of carbon dioxide in the alveolus. so if this is porous to carbon dioxide, this membrane-- and it is, these carbon dioxide molecules are going to diffuse into the alveolus.
Now on the other side of that-- we have oxygen here.
We're breathing it in.
The air is 21% oxygen so you're actually going to have a lot more oxygen than carbon dioxide.
And this is de-oxygenated blood.
We used all of the oxygen in our body and we'll talk more about that either at the end of this video or in a future video on how we use it or where it goes in our body, but there's no oxygen here so the oxygen is going to be taken-- it's going to diffuse across this membrane because the concentration of oxygen is low.
Now the question is-- so immediately you see that as the oxygen diffuses across this membrane, all of a sudden, this is oxygenated blood ready to go back to the heart.
So this transition between artery and vein is a very subtle thing.
Very clearly here, you say that, OK, this is going from the heart.
This is our vein.
This is going to the heart-- sorry.
I always get confused.
This is going away from the heart-- and I was looking for an A and I wrote from.
This is away from the heart so this is an artery.
And this is going to the heart so this is a vein.
So you could make the division.
You could say, OK, once it's oxygenated, maybe we're going back to the heart, but it's kind of an arbitrary-- sorry.
I spelled artery wrong.
These are my flaws.
Spelling was never my strong suit.
So it's hard to say where the artery ends and the vein begins.
A good demarcation is when the carbon dioxide concentration goes low and that the oxygen concentration goes high.
That's a good time, where we start from the pulmonary artery.
Probably in the next video, I will a make a very-- you'll see why the pulmonary arteries are special, because pulmonary arteries coming away from the heart have no oxygen or very little oxygen and they have a lot of carbon dioxide.
So pulmonary veins, which is-- it's arbitrary where the artery turns into a vein.
Once it gets oxygenated, it's ready to go back to the heart.
It's a pulmonary vein and it is oxygenated.
So it has oxygenated-- and we could write de-oxygenated.
Now the reason why I say it's special besides the fact that pulmonary arteries and veins go to and from the lungs, is that they're kind of the opposite.
Because in the rest of the body when we're going away from the heart or we're talking about arteries, you're going to see that that's oxygenated blood, while when we're going away from the heart to the lungs, that's de-oxygenated blood.
Similarly in the rest of the body, when we're going to the heart, where you're to see that that's de-oxygenated blood, but in the pulmonary vein, when we're going to the heart, it's oxygenated because the lungs are what take up the carbon dioxide and give us the oxygen.
Now I still haven't answered that interesting question that rose on the message board on the last video.
What happens to the 78% of nitrogen that's sitting here?
There's just a ton of nitrogen over here, more than the oxygen, a lot more than the carbon dioxide.
What happens to all of these nitrogen molecules?
And the answer is, nitrogen can diffuse and does diffuse into the blood, but the blood's ability to take in nitrogen isn't that high.
And you might say, well, why is oxygen special?
Why can the blood take up oxygen so much easier than nitrogen?
And that's where the red blood cells come into play.
Let me write this down.
I'll write it in red.
Red blood cells, which are fascinating on a whole set of levels.
What red blood cells-- these are these cells that are sitting in-- they're flowing through our circulatory system and they look kind of like lozenges, if I were to draw one.
They're kind of like a flattened sphere with a little divot on either side of it-- a lot like a lozenge.
So if I were to draw it from the side, it might look something like-- well, from the side, it would look like that and if you could see through it, there'd be a little divot on each side.
If I were to draw it at an angle, it would look something like this.
There'd be a little divot on that side and there'd be a similar divot on the other side.
And red blood cells-- and I could do a whole set of videos just on red blood cells-- they contain hemoglobin.
Maybe we'll do a whole video on hemoglobin.
The hemoglobin are these small proteins that contain four hem groups.
So inside of red blood cells, you have millions of hemoglobin proteins.
And the hemoglobin proteins-- I'll just draw them as this-- they have these four heme groups.
And heme groups, the main component is iron.
And that's why iron is so important.
If you don't have enough iron, you're going to have trouble processing oxygen in your blood and your hemoglobin won't be functional enough.
But it has iron on it.
It has four of these heme groups.
And each of these heme groups can bond to oxygen molecules.
They're very good binders of oxygen.
And we're going to see in a little bit-- probably the next video-- how they release the oxygen, but this has tons, this has millions of heme groups in it and the oxygen diffuses across the membrane of the red blood cells and bonds to to the heme groups on your hemoglobin.
So because the red blood cells have the hemoglobin inside of them, they're like these sponges for oxygen because hemoglobin is so good at taking in oxygen.
So the red blood cells are able to essentially suck up all of the oxygen out of the plasma.
The plasma we can view as just the general fluid of the blood, not including the red blood cells.
So the red blood cell here isn't so red.
And the reason-- and this is the key point-- the reason why it's not so red-- maybe we had a red blood cell over here-- let me make it clear.
Carbon dioxide for the most part is traveling within the plasma.
It gets absorbed into the actual fluid and I'll talk about it in a future video.
It's actually in a slightly different form.
It's as carbonic acid and that's actually a key point for how the plasma knows where to dump the oxygen, but I'll talk about that in a future video.
But over here, this red blood cell has a bunch of hemoglobin proteins in it, but those hemoglobin proteins have dumped their oxygen.
And it actually turns out it's the hemoglobin-- so with oxygen, hemoglobin looks red.
It reflects red light.
When it doesn't have oxygen, hemoglobin does not look red.
It looks kind of purplish, bluish, darkish-- something.
And that's why in most of your body, your veins that have de-oxygenated red blood cells look kind of bluish.
And the reason why it changes color is that when the oxygen bonds to the hem sites on the hemoglobin, it actually changes the entire confirmation, the entire structure of the protein.
We've see that multiple times.
The whole protein folds in such a way that all of a sudden, instead of purplish or dark light being reflected, now red light is reflected.
And that's why red blood cells will become red once they take the oxygen.
But I'm going on a tangent.
The whole point here is saying, why we taking up so much more oxygen than nitrogen, given that there's less oxygen in the atmosphere than nitrogen?
And the key is these red blood cells.
These red blood cells have these millions of hemoglobin proteins inside of them and they take them up and they sop up all of the oxygen out of the plasma.
Actually, they sop about 98.5% of the oxygen.
So these red blood cells are just traveling and they're going to go back to the heart.
They are what make our blood red.
So you have this thing, hemoglobin, that's sitting in red blood cells.
It's sopping up all the oxygen.
So it keeps the oxygen concentration and the actual plasma low.
You have nothing like that for nitrogen.
There is no cell that's sopping up the nitrogen.
Nitrogen does not bond to hemoglobin.
So that's why oxygen is taken up so much better than nitrogen.
It's a very interesting question because if you just think about how much nitrogen is, it's kind of a very natural idea.
Now I want to focus a little bit on the red blood cell itself because it's fascinating.
In the video on the structure of the cell, I start off saying, all cells have a membrane and they all have DNA.
Now, the fascinating thing about a red blood cell-- I already said it has millions of hemoglobin molecules or proteins inside of it.
The fascinating thing about a red blood cell-- it has no nucleus.
And no DNA.
This is mind boggling when I first found out.
I was like, well, why is it a cell?
Is it really even a living thing?
And it turns out when it's growing, it does have a nucleus.
All cells need a nucleus with DNA in order to generate the proteins that build it up, in order to exist and structurally make itself the way it needs to be made, but the whole point of a red blood cell is to contain as much hemoglobin as possible.
And so you can imagine, this is actually a favorable evolutionary trait, that as red blood cells are ready to go into business, you've built the whole structure, they actually get rid of their nucleus.
They actually push their nucleus out of the cell and the whole reason why that's beneficial is, that's more space for hemoglobin.
Because the more hemoglobin you have, the more oxygen you can take up.
And I can do a ton of videos on hemoglobin and all of that-- and actually, I'm going to do a lot more on the circulatory system so don't worry about that, but I want to go over one other really interesting thing about hemoglobin.
We already talked about red blood cells.
I think it's fascinating that they actually don't have a nucleus in their mature form.
They actually have very short lives.
They live maybe 80, 120 days so they're not these long lived cells-- so it's almost a philosophical question.
Are are they still alive once they've lost their DNA or are they just vessels for oxygen that aren't really alive because they aren't regenerating and producing their own DNA?
So actually, instead of going into the hemoglobin discussion right now, I'll leave you there in this video.
I realize I've been making 20-minute videos where my goal is really to make ten-minute ones.
So I'll leave you here and in the next video, we'll talk more about hemoglobin and the circulatory system.
In the last video, I showed you what a neuron looked like and we talked about the different parts of a neuron, and I gave you the general idea what a neuron does.
It gets stimulated at the dendrites-- and the stimulation we'll talk about in future videos on what exactly that means-- and that that impulse, that information, that signal gets added up.
If there's multiple stimulation points on various dendrites, it gets added up and if it meets some threshold
level, it's going to create this action potential or signal that travels across the axon and maybe stimulates other neurons or muscles because these terminal points of the axons might be connected to dendrites of other neurons or to muscle cells or who knows what.
But what I want to do in this video is kind of lay the building blocks for exactly what this signal is or how does a neuron actually transmit this information across the axon-- or really, how does it go from the dendrite all the way to the axon?
Before I actually even talk about that, we need to kind of lay the ground rules-- or a ground understanding of the actual voltage potential across the membrane of a neuron.
And, actually, all cells have some voltage potential difference, but it's especially relevant when we talk about a neuron and its ability to send signals.
Let's zoom in on a neuron's cell.
I'm going to zoom in on its membrane.
So let's say that this is the membrane of the neuron, just like that.
That's the membrane.
This is outside the neuron or the cell.
And then this is inside the neuron or the cell.
Now, you have sodium and potassium ions floating around.
I'm going to draw sodium like this.
Sodium's going to be a circle.
So that's sodium and their positively charged ions have a plus one charge and then potassium, I'll draw them as little triangles.
So let's say that's potassium-- symbol for potassium is K.
It's also positively charged.
And you have them just lying around.
Let's say we start off both inside and outside of the cell.
Sodium inside, some sodium outside.
Now it turns out that cells have more positive charge outside of their membranes than inside of their membranes.
So there's actually a potential difference that if the membrane wasn't there, negative charges would want to escape or positive charges or positive ions would want to get in.
The outside ends up being more positive, and we're going to talk about why.
If this is less positive than that-- if I have a positive charge here, it's going to want to go to the less positive side.
It's going to want to go away from the other positive charges.
It's repelled by the other positive charges.
Likewise, if I had a negative charge here, it'd want to go the other side-- or a positive charge, I guess, would be happier being here than over here.
But the question is, how does that happen?
Because left to their own devices, the charges would disperse so you wouldn't have this potential gradient.
Somehow we have to put energy into the system in order to produce this state where we have more positive on the charge of the outside than we do on the inside.
And that's done by sodium potassium pumps.
I'm going to draw then a certain way.
This is obviously not how the protein actually looks, but it'll give you a sense of how it actually pumps things out.
Maybe it looks like this and you'll have a sense of why I drew it like this.
So that side of the protein or the enzyme-- and then the other side, I'll draw it like this.
It looks something like this, and of course the real protein doesn't look like this.
You've seen me show you what proteins really look like.
They look like big clusters of things, hugely complex.
Different parts of the proteins can bond to different things and when things bond to proteins, they change shape.
But I'm doing a very simple diagram here and what I want to show you is, this is our sodium potassium pump in its inactivated state.
And what happens in this situation is that we have these nice places where our sodium can bind to.
So in this situation, sodium can bind to these locations on our enzyme or on our protein.
And if we just had the sodiums bind and we didn't have any energy going into the system, nothing would happen.
It would just stay in this situation.
The actual protein might look like something crazy.
The actual protein might be this big cloud of protein and then your sodiums bond there, there, and there.
Maybe it's inside the protein somehow, but still, nothing's going to happen just when the sodium bonds on this side of the protein.
In order for it to do anything, in order for it to pump anything out, it uses the energy from ATP.
So we had all those videos on respiration and I told you that ATP was the currency of energy in the cell-- well, this is something useful for ATP to do.
ATP-- that's adenosine triphosphate-- it might go to some other part of our enzyme, but in this diagram maybe it goes to this part of the enzyme.
And this enzyme, it's a type of ATPase.
When I say ATPase, it breaks off a phosphate from the ATP-- and that's just by virtue of its shape.
It's able to plunk it off.
When it plunks off the phosphate, it changes shape.
So step one, we have sodium ions-- and actually, let's keep count of them.
We have three sodium-- these are the actual ratios-- three sodium ions from inside the cell or the neuron.
They bond to pump, which is really a protein that crosses our membrane.
Now, step two, we have also ATP.
ATP gets broken into ATP plus phosphate on the actual protein and that changes the shape.
So that also provides energy to change pump's shape.
Now after, our pump might look something like this.
Let me clear out some space right here.
I'll draw the after pump right there.
After the phosphate gets split off of the ATP, it might look something like this.
Instead of being in that configuration, it opens in the other direction.
So now it might look something like this.
And of course it's carrying these phosphate groups.
They have a positive charge.
This side now looks like this.
So now the phosphates are released to the outside.
So they've been pumped to the outside.
Remember, this is required energy because it's going against the natural gradient.
You're taking positive charge and you're pushing them to an environment that is even more positive and you're also taking it to an environment where there's already a lot of sodium, and you're putting more sodium there.
So you're going against the charge gradient and you're going against the sodium gradient.
But now-- I guess we call it step three-- the sodium gets released outside the cell.
And when this changes shape, it's not so good at bonding with the sodium anymore.
So maybe these can become a little bit different too, so that the sodium can't even bond in this configuration now that the protein has changed shape due to the ATP.
So step three, the three Na plusses, sodium ions-- are released outside.
Now once it's in this configuration, we have all these positive ions out here.
These positive ions want to get really as far away from each other as possible.
They'd actually probably be attracted to the cell itself because the cell is less positive on the inside.
So these positive ions-- and in particular, the potassium-- can bond this side of the protein when it's in this-- I guess we could call it this activated configuration.
So now, I guess we could call it step four.
We have two sodium ions bond to-- I guess we could call it the activated pump-- or changed pump.
Or maybe we could say it's in its open form.
So they come here and when they bond, it re-changes the shape of this protein back to this shape, back to that open shape.
Now when it goes back to the open shape, these guys aren't here anymore, but we have these two guys sitting here and in this shape right here, all of a sudden these divots-- maybe they're not divots.
They're actually things in this big cluster of protein.
They're not as good at staying bonded or holding onto these sodiums so these sodiums get released into the cell.
So step five, the pump-- this changes shape of pump.
So pump changes shape to original.
And then once we're in the original, those two sodium ions released inside the cell.
We're going to see in the next few videos why it's useful to have those sodium ions on the inside.
You might say, well, why don't we just keep pumping things on the outside in order to have a potential difference?
But we'll see these sodium ions are actually also very useful.
So what's the net effect that's going on?
We end up with a lot more sodium ions on the outside and we end up with more potassium ions on the inside, but I told you that the inside is less positive than the outside.
But these are both positive.
I don't care if I have more potassium or sodium, but if you paid attention to the ratios I talked about, every time we use an ATP, we're pumping out three sodiums and we're only pumping in two potassiums, right?
We pumped out three sodiums and two potassiums.
Each of them have a plus-1 charge, but every time we do this, we're adding a net-1 charge to the outside, right?
3 on the outside, 2 to the inside.
We have a net-1 charge-- we have a plus-1 to the outside.
So we're making the outside more positive, especially relative to the inside.
And this is what creates that potential difference.
If you actually took a voltmeter-- a voltmeter measures electrical potential difference-- and you took the voltage difference between that point and this point-- or more specifically, between this point and that point, if you were to subtract the voltage here from the voltage there, you will get -70 millivolts, which is generally considered the resting voltage difference, the potential difference across the membrane of a neuron when it's in its resting state.
So in this video, I kind of laid out the foundation of why and how a cell using ATP, using energy, is able to maintain a potential difference across its membrane where the outside is slightly more positive than the inside.
So we actually have a negative potential difference if we're comparing the inside to the outside.
Positive charge would want to move in if they were allowed to, and negative charge would want to move out if it was allowed to.
Now there might be one last question.
You might say, well, if we just kept adding charge out here, our voltage difference would get really negative.
This would be much more negative than the outside.
Why does it stabilize at -70?
To answer that question-- these are going to come into play in a lot more detail in future videos-- you also have channels, which are really protein structures that in their open position will allow sodium to go through them.
And there are also channels that are in their open position, would allow potassium to go through them.
I'm drawing it in their closed position.
And we're going to talk in the next video about what happens when they open.
But in their closed position, they're still a little bit leaky.
And if, say, the concentration of potassium becomes too high down here-- and too high meaning when they start to reach this threshold of -70 millivolts-- or even better, when the sodium gets too high out there, a few of them will start to leak down.
When the concentration gets really high and this is really positive just because of the electrical potential, some of them will just be shoved through.
So it'll keep us right around -70 millivolts.
And if we go below, maybe some of the potassium gets leaked through the other way.
So even though when these are shut-- if it becomes too ridiculous-- if it goes to -80 millivolts or -90 millivolts, all of a sudden, there'd be a huge incentive for some of this stuff to leak through their respective channels.
So that's what allows us to stay at that stable voltage potential.
In the next video, we're going to see what happens to this voltage potential when the neuron is actually stimulated.
We're on problem 53.
It says Toni is solving this equation by completing the square. ax squared plus bx plus c is equal to 0, where a is greater than 0.
So this is just a traditional quadratic right here.
And let's see what they did.
First, he subtracted c from both sides and he got ax squared plus bx is equal to minus c.
In this video we're going to talk about another way of visualizing data called the histogram, which is a very fancy word for a not so fancy thing.
I think it's probably fair to say that the histogram is the most used way of representing statistical data.
Let me just show you how to figure out a histogram for some data, and I think you're going to get the point pretty easily.
So I have some data here and I want to represent it with a histogram.
What we're going to see is how frequent are each of these numbers.
And in order to figure that out, let me just write the numbers down, let me just categorize them in their respective buckets.
So I have a 1 here.
I have a 4, so I want to leave space for the 2, the 3, and put a 4 there.
I have a 2.
I have a 1.
Let me put that 1 on a stack right above that 1.
I have a 0-- let me put the 0 to the left of the 1.
I want to put them in order.
I have a 2, another 2.
Let me stack that above my first 2.
I have another 1.
Let me stack that above my other two 1's.
I have another 0.
Let me stack it there.
I have another 1.
Then I have another 2.
Another 1.
I have two more 0's.
0, 0.
I have two more 2's.
I have a 3.
I have two more 1's.
Another 3.
And then I have a 6.
So no 5's, and then I have a 6.
And that space right there was unnecessary.
But right here I've listed-- I've just rewritten those numbers and I've essentially categorized them.
Now what I want to do is calculate how many of each of these numbers we have.
So let me go down here.
So I want to look at the frequency of each of these numbers.
So I have one, two, three, four 0's.
I have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven 1's.
I have one, two, three, four, five 2's.
I have one, two 3's.
I have one 4, and one 6.
So we could write it this way.
We could write the number, and then we can have the frequency.
So I have the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4-- we could even throw 5 in there, although 5 has a frequency of 0.
And we have a 6.
So the 0 showed up four times in this data set.
1 showed up seven times in this data set.
2 showed up five times, 3 showed up to two times, 4 showed up one time, 5 didn't show up, and 6 showed up one time.
All I did is I counted this data set, and I did this first.
But you could say how many times do I see a 0?
I see it one, two, three, four times.
How many times do I see a 1?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven times.
That's what we mean by frequency.
Now a histogram is really just a plot, kind of a bar graph, plotting the frequency of each of these numbers.
It's going to look a lot like this original thing that I drew.
So let me draw some axes here.
So the different buckets here are the numbers.
And that worked out because we're dealing with very clean integers that tend to repeat.
If you're dealing with things that the exact number doesn't repeat, oftentimes people will put the numbers into buckets or ranges.
But here they fit into nice little buckets.
You have the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
This is the actual numbers.
And then on the vertical axis we're going to plot the frequency.
So one, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
So that's 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
So 0 shows up four times.
So we'll draw a little bar graph here.
0 shows up four times.
Draw it just like that.
That is that information right there.
1 shows up seven times.
So I'll do a little bar graph.
1 shows up seven times. Just like that.
I want to make it a little bit straighter than that-- 1 shows up seven times.
2-- I'll do it in a different color-- 2 shows up five times.
Do a bar graph, go all the way up to five.
2 shows up five times.
3 shows up two times.
We have one 3, two 3's.
4 shows up one time here. 5 doesn't show up at all.
So it doesn't even get any height there.
And then finally, 6 shows up one time.
So I'll do 6 showing up one time.
What I just plotted here, this is a histogram.
This right here is a histogram.
Very fancy word, but I think you will agree it's a fairly simple idea.
Figure out the frequency of each of these numbers and then plot the frequency of each of these numbers and you get yourself a histogram.
That's it!
Welcome to the presentation on BASlC ADDlTION.
I know what you're thinking:
"Sal, addition doesn't seem so basic to me."
Well, I apologize.
I hope I --
Hopefully, by the end of this presentation, or in a couple of weeks, it will seem basic.
So lets get started with,
I guess we could say, some problems.
Well, let's say I start with an old classic.
1 + 1
And I think you already know how to do this.
But, I'll kind of show you a way of doing this, in case you don't have this memorized, or you haven't already mastered this.
You say, well, if I have one (Let's call that an avocado.)
If I have 1 avocado, and then you were to give me another avocado, how many avocados do I now have?
Well, let's see.
I have 1 ... 2 avocados.
So 1 + 1 is equal to 2.
Now, I know what you are thinking:
"That was too easy."
So, let me give you something a little bit more difficult.
I like the avocados.
I might stick with that theme.
What is 3 + 4?
Hmm.
This is, I think, a more difficult problem.
Well, let's stick with the avocados.
And in case you don't know what an avocado is, it's, it's actually a very delicious fruit.
It's actually the fattiest of all the fruits.
You probably didn't even think it was a fruit -- even if you [have eaten] one.
So, let's say I have 3 avocados.
1, 2, 3. Right?
1, 2, 3.
And let's say you were to give me 4 more avocados.
So let me put this 4 in yellow, so you know that these are the ones you're giving me.
1 2 3 4
So how many total avocados do I have now?
That's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 avocados.
So 3 + 4 is equal to 7.
And now I am going to introduce you to another way of thinking about this.
It's called the number line.
And, actually, I think this is how I do it in my head, when I forget -- if I don't have it memorized.
So [on the] number line, I just write all the numbers in order, and I go high enough just so I can -- [so that] all the numbers I am using are, kind of, in it.
So, you know the first number is 0, which is nothing.
Maybe you don't know; but now you know.
And then you go to 1 (one) 2 (two) 3 (three)
4 (four) 5 (five) 6 (six) 7 (seven) 8 (eight) 9 (nine) 10 (ten)
It keeps going, 11 (eleven)
So, we're sayng 3 + 4.
So let's start at 3.
So I have 3 here.
And we're going to add 4 to that 3.
So all we do is we go up the number line, or we go to the right on the number line, 4 more.
So we go 1 ... 2 ... 3 ... 4.
Notice, all we did is we just increased it by 1, by 2, by 3, by 4.
And then we ended up at 7.
And that was our answer.
We could do a couple of different ones.
We could say, what is --
What if I asked you what 8 + 1 is?
Hmmm.
8 + 1.
Well, you might already know it.
8 + 1 is just the next number [after 8].
But if you look at the number line, you start at 8, and you add 1.
8 + 1 is equal to 9.
Let's do some harder problems.
And, just so you know, if you're a little daunted by this initially, you can always draw the circles, you can always do the number line, and, eventually over time, the more practice you do, you'll hopefully memorize these, and you'll do these problems in, like, half a second.
I promise you.
You've just got to keep practicing.
Let's say....
I want to draw the number line again.
Actually, I have a line tool; so I shouldn't give you all of those ugly looking lines that I've been giving you.
That's amazing.
Alright, let me see. Oh.
Yeah, look at that.
Okay. So, that's a nice looking line.
I'm gonna feel bad to erase it later on.
So let me draw a number line.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
So let's do a hard problem.
What is --
I'm gonna do it in different colors now.
5 + 6
So if you want, you can pause the video and try this.
You might already know the answer.
And the reason why I say this is a hard problem is because the answer [is] more [than the] [number of fingers you have on your two hands].
So you can't necessarily do it on your fingers.
So let's get started with this problem.
Actually, my phone is ringing.
But I'm going to ignore the phone, because you're more important.
So. Okay.
Let's start start at the 5.
So we start at the 5.
And we're gonna add 6 to it.
So we go:
1 2 3 4 5 6
We're at 11!
So 5 + 6 is equal to 11.
Now I'm gonna ask you a question.
What is 6 + 5?
Huh...
Well, we're now going to see that, OK?
Can you switch the two numbers and get the same answer?
Well, let's try that.
I'm gonna try it in a different color, so we don't get all confused.
So let's start at 6. Right?
Ignore the yellow for now and add 5 to it.
1 ... 2 ... 3 ... 4 ... 5.
Ah.
We get to the same place.
And I think you might want to try this on a bunch of problems.
And you'll see it always works out -- that it doesn't matter in what order you --
"5 + 6" is the same thing as "6 + 5."
And that makes sense.
If I have 5 avocados and you give me 6,
I'm gonna have 11.
If I have 6 avocados and you gave me 5,
I'm gonna have 11 -- either way.
Let's do a couple of --
Since this number line is so nice,
I wanna do a few more problems using it.
Although, as I use it,
I'm sure I'll just continue to confuse you,
'cause I'll write so much on top of it.
But --
Let's see. I'll use white now.
What is -- What is 8 + 7?
Well, if you can still read this, 8 is right here. Right?
We're gonna add 7 to it.
1 ... 2 ... 3 ... 4 ... 5 ... 6 ... 7.
We go to 15.
8 + 7 is 15.
So hopefully, that gives you a sense of how to do these types of problems.
And more than, I guess this -- and you're gonna learn multiplication in a little bit.
But these types of problems are, when you're getting started off in mathematics, these kind of require the most practice.
And, to some degree, you have to start memorizing them.
But, over time, you know, when you look back,
I want you to remember how you feel while you are watching this video right now.
And then I want you to watch this video in, like, three years.
And remember how you felt when you're watching it now.
And you're going to be, "O my!
This was so easy!"
'Cause you're gonna learn so fast.
So, anyway, I think you have an idea.
If you don't know the answer to any of the addition problems, that we give you in the exercises, you can press the "Hints," and it'll draw circles, and then you can just count up the circles.
Or, if you want to do it on your own, so you get the problem right, you could draw the circles, or you could draw a number line, --
I think you might be ready to tackle the addition problems. Have fun!
Welcome to the presentation on level two addition. Well I think we should get started with some problems, and hopefully as we work through them, you'll have an understanding of how to do these types of problems. Let's see...
Let's say I had 11 plus 4. So at first you'd say hey, Sal, you know, 11 plus 4, I don't know how to add two-digit numbers yet. Well there's a couple of ways we can think about this.
And then we'll actually try to visually represent it to show you how you could actually do this type of problem in your head as well. you'll have an understanding of how to do these types of problems.
Let's see...
Let me make sure the pen tool is correct. Okay.
Let's say I had 11+4.
So at first you'd say hey, Sal, you know, 11+4, I don't know how to add 2-digit numbers yet.
Well there's a couple of ways we can think about this.
First I'll show you how all you have to know is how to add 1-digit numbers and you can use something called carrying to solve the whole problem. And then we'll actually try to visually represent it to show you how you could actually do this type of problem in your head as well.
So what you do with these types of problems is you first look at the right-most digit on the 11.
We call this the one's place, right?
Because this one is one, and we call this the ten's place.
I know I'm going to confuse you a lot, but that's just so how everything looks-- that's so everything looks easier later on.
You take that one and you add it to the number right below it.
So 1+4=5.
You knew that, right?
Right?
You know that 1+4=5.
And that's all I did here.
I just said this 1 + this 4 = 5.
Now I go to this one.
This 1+ -- well there's nothing here other than a plus sign and that's not a number.
So this one plus nothing is one.
So we put a one here.
And we get 11+4=15.
And just so you know that this system actually works. Let's actually draw it out in a couple of different ways Just to give you the intuition of 11+4.
So if I had 11 balls -- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
That's 11, right?
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Okay!
So that's 11 and we're going to add 4 to it.
So 1, 2, 3, 4,
So now all we have to do is count how many total circles or balls we have now.
That's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
15, and I don't recommend that you do this every time you do a problem because it'll take you a long time.
But hey, if you ever get confused, it's better to take along time than to get it wrong.
Let's think about another way of representing this, because I think different visual approaches appeal in different ways to different people.
Let's draw a number line.
I don't know if you've seen a number line before but you're going to see it now.
And a number line, all I do is I draw out all the numbers in order.
So 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 -- I'm doing them small so I know I can get to 15.
And these arrows mean that the numbers keep going in both directions.
I know this is a little early for you to learn this.
But actually the numbers can actually keep going to the left below zero as well.
I'll leave you to think about that.
But anyway, so let's go back to this problem.
So we have 11, so let me circle 11 -- let me see where 11 is on the number line.
11 is here, right?
This is 11.
And we're adding 4.
So when you add, that means we're gonna increase 11 by 4.
So that when you increase we're going to go up the number line, right?
Or we're going to go the right on the number line, because the numbers are getting bigger.
So we'd go 1, 2, 3, 4 -- bam!
We're at fifteen.
Once again, this takes a long time.
But if you ever get confused or you forget what one plus four is, although I don't think you should, then you could just do it this way.
Let's do some maybe harder problems now.
Let's do, let's do 28+7.
Okay.
8+7 -- I'll tell you, frankly, even to this day,
I sometimes get confused with 8+7.
So let's-- If you know the answer then you already know how to do this problem, you can just write whatever the answer is right here.
But let's draw it out on the number line, because I think a little bit of more basic addition practices isn't unwarranted at this point.
So we could do it with the number line again.
8+7.
And this time I'm not going to start at 0, I'll start at like 5, because, you know, if you keep going you'll get to 0 eventually.
So let's see you get 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and so on
And it'll keep going to a hundred and a thousand and a million billion trillion.
So what are we doing?
We start at eight because this is 8+7.
We want to figure out what 8+7 is.
So we start at 8.
And we're going to add 7 to it.
Let me change colors.
So you go 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Oh, that 15 shows up again.
So 8+7 is equal to 15.
And over time as you do practice, I think you'll memorize these that 8+7=15 or whatever, 6+7=13 or any of these.
But in the interim it actually doesn't hurt to do this number line because you actually are visualizing what's happening.
And you can do it with the circles as well.
So we know 8+7=15.
So this is a new thing you're going to learn right now.
You don't write the whole 15 down here.
You write the 5 -- you write this 5 right here.
And then that 1, you carry the 1.
You put it up there.
I think in a future presentation I'll explain why this works and maybe you might even kind of have an intuition because the 1 is in the ten's place, and this is the ten's place.
I don't want to confuse you. So you have that 1 and now you add it to the 2, and you get 35.
Right?
Because 1+2=3, right?
So you're done.
35.
And you might ask, well, does that make sense that 28+7=35?
And there's a couple of ways I'd like to think about this.
Well, 8+7 we know is 15, right?
And I don't know how comfortable you are with higher numbers.
But 8+7 -- so look at this pattern.
8+7=15. 18+7 -- you're probably saying, Sal, where are you getting the 18 from, but take my word for it.
18+7=25.
28+7=35 which is the one that we just did.
That is a check mark.
And if you kept going, you said 38+7, that actually equals 45.
So you might see a little pattern here, and then you can just sit and think about this for a little bit if you like.
Another way you could think about this, if you still don't believe me, is you say, okay, if I have 28, if I add 1, I get 29.
If I add 2, I get 30. If I add 3, I get 31.
If I add 4, I get 32.
If I add 5, I get 33.
If I add 6, I get 34.
And if I add 7, I get 35 again.
Right, all I did is I kept saying oh, if I had one more
I'll get larger a little bit -- the number a little bit larger.
Let's do some more problems, and I think we'll do a couple more.
Let's do it a little faster because you might get what we're doing here now.
Let's do a hard one.
Let's do 99+9.
So what's 9+9?
So if you don't know what it is, you can work it out either using the number line or drawing the circles.
And, you know that's a fair way to do it, although you should eventually kind of know it.
9+9 it turns out is 18.
9+9 is equal to 18...so 9+9... and you put the 8 down here and you carry the 1.
And now you just say 1+9.
Well you know what 1+9 is.
1+ 9=10.
And so there's nowhere to carry this 1, so you write the whole thing down here.
So 99+9=108.
Let's do one more problem.
Let's say 56+7.
Well what's six plus seven.
Well 6+7=13, right?
If you get confused, draw out everything again.
And then you get 1+5.
1+5=6.
63.
And you might want to give yourself a bunch of problems and I think you're also now, if you understand what we did, ready to try the level 2 addition problems.
Have fun!
Where I left off in the last video, we talked about how the hemoglobin in red blood cells is what sops up all of the oxygen so that it increases the diffusion gradient-- or it increases the incentive, we could say, for the oxygen to go across the membrane.
We know that the oxygen molecules don't know that there's less oxygen here, but if you watch the video on diffusion you know how that process happens.
If there's less concentration here than there, the oxygen will diffuse across the membrane and there's less inside the plasma because the hemoglobin is sucking it all up like a sponge.
Now, one interesting question is, why does the hemoglobin even have to reside within the red blood cells?
Why aren't hemoglobin proteins just freely floating in the blood plasma?
That seems more efficient.
You don't have to have things crossing through, in and out of, these red blood cell membranes.
You wouldn't have to make red blood cells.
What's the use of having these containers of hemoglobin?
It's actually a very interesting idea.
If you had all of the hemoglobin sitting in your blood plasma, it would actually hurt the flow of the blood.
The blood would become more viscous or more thick.
I don't want to say like syrup, but it would become thicker than blood is right now-- and by packaging the hemoglobin inside these containers, inside the red blood cells, what it allows the blood to do is flow a lot better.
Imagine if you wanted to put syrup in water.
If you just put syrup straight into water, what's going to happen?
The water's going to become a little syrupy, a little bit more viscous and not flow as well.
So what's the solution if you wanted to transport syrup in water?
Well, you could put the syrup inside little containers or inside little beads and then let the beads flow in the water and then the water wouldn't be all gooey-- and that's exactly what's happening inside of our blood.
Instead of having the hemoglobin sit in the plasma and make it gooey, it sits inside these beads that we call red blood cells that allows the flow to still be non-viscous.
So I've been all zoomed in here on the alveolus and these capillaries, these pulmonary capillaries-- let's zoom out a little bit-- or zoom out a lot-- just to understand, how is the blood flowing?
And get a better understanding of pulmonary arteries and veins relative to the other arteries and veins that are in the body.
So here-- I copied this from Wikipedia, this diagram of the human circulatory system-- and here in the back you can see the lungs.
Let me do it in a nice dark color.
So we have our lungs here.
And what we learned in the last few videos is that we have our little alveoli and our lungs.
Remember, we get to them from our bronchioles, which are branching off of the bronchi, which branch off of the trachea, which connects to our larynx, which connects to our pharynx, which connects to our mouth and nose.
But anyway, we have our little alveoli right there and then we have the capillaries.
So when we go away from the heart-- and we're going to delve a little bit into the heart in this video as well-- so when blood travels away from the heart, it's de-oxygenated.
It's this blue color.
So this right here is blood.
This right here is blood traveling away from the heart.
It's going behind these two tubes right there.
So this is the blood going away from the heart.
So this blue that I've been highlighting just now, these are the pulmonary arteries and then they keep splitting into arterials and all of that and eventually we're in capillaries-- super, super small tubes.
They run right past the alveoli and then they become oxygenated and now we're going back to the heart.
So we're talking about pulmonary veins.
So we go back to the heart.
So these capillaries-- in the capillaries we get oxygen.
Now we're going to go back to the heart.
Hope you can see what I'm doing.
And we're going to enter the heart on this side.
You actually can't even see where we're entering the heart.
We're going to enter the heart right over here-- and I'm going to go into more detail on that.
Now we have oxygenated blood.
It's red.
And then that gets pumped out to the rest of the body.
Now this is the interesting thing.
When we're talking about pulmonary arteries and veins-- remember, the pulmonary artery was blue.
As we go away from the heart, we have de-oxygenated blood, but it's still an artery.
Then as we go towards the heart from the lungs, we have a vein, but it's oxygenated.
But what we have is, the heart pumps de-oxygenated blood from the right ventricle.
You're saying, hey, why is it the right ventricle?
That looks like the left side of the drawing, but it's this dude's right-hand side, right?
This is this guy's right hand.
And this is this dude's left hand.
He's looking at us, right?
We don't care about our right or left.
We care about this guy's right and left.
And he's looking at us.
He's got some eyeballs and he's looking at us.
So this is his right ventricle.
Actually, let me just start off with the whole cycle.
So we have de-oxygenated blood coming from the rest of the body, right?
The name for this big pipe is called the inferior vena cava-- inferior because it's coming up below.
Actually, you have blood coming up from the arms and the head up here.
They're both meeting right here, in the right atrium.
Let me label that.
I'm going to do a big diagram of the heart in a second.
Because this is blood returning from our legs if we're running, or returning from our brain, that had to use respiration-- or maybe we're working out and it's returning from our biceps, but it's de-oxygenated blood.
It shows up right here in the right atrium.
It's on our left, but this guy's right-hand side.
From the right atrium, it gets pumped into the right ventricle.
It actually passively flows into the right ventricle.
The ventricles do all the pumping, then the ventricle contracts and pumps this blood right here-- and you don't see it, but it's going behind this part right here.
It goes from here through this pipe.
So you don't see it.
I'm going to do a detailed diagram in a second-- into the pulmonary artery.
We're going away from the heart.
This was a vein, right?
This is a vein going to the heart.
This is a vein, inferior vena cava vein.
This is superior vena cava.
These are veins.
They're de-oxygenated.
Then I'm pumping this de-oxygenated blood away from the heart to the lungs.
Now this de-oxygenated blood, this is in an artery, right?
This is in the pulmonary artery.
It gets oxygenated and now it's a pulmonary vein.
And once it's oxygenated, it shows up here in the left-- let me do a better color than that-- it shows up right here in the left atrium.
Atrium, you can imagine-- it's kind of a room with a skylight or that's open to the outside and in both of these cases, things are entering from above-- not sunlight, but blood is entering from above.
On the right atrium, the blood is entering from above.
And in the left atrium, the blood is entering-- and remember, the left atrium is on the right-hand side from our point of view-- on the left atrium, the blood is entering from above from the lungs, from the pulmonary veins.
Then it goes into-- and I'll go into more detail-- into the left ventricle and then the left ventricle pumps that oxygenated blood to the rest of the body via the non-pulmonary arteries.
So everything pumps out.
Let me make it a nice dark, non-blue color.
So it pumps it out through there.
You don't see it right here, the way it's drawn.
It's a little bit of a strange drawing.
It's hard to visualize, but I'll show it in more detail and then it goes to the rest of the body.
Let me show you that detail right now.
Let's label it right here.
This is the superior vena cava.
This is a vein from the upper part of our body from our arms and heads.
This is the inferior vena vaca.
This is veins from our abdomen and from our legs and the rest of our body.
So it it first enters the right atrium.
Remember, we call the right atrium because this is someone's heart facing us, even though this is on the left-hand side.
It enters through here.
It's de-oxygenated blood.
It's coming from veins. the body used the oxygen.
Then it shows up in the right ventricle, right?
These are valves in our heart.
And it passively, once the right ventricle pumps and then releases, it has a vacuum and it pulls more blood from the right atrium.
It pumps again and then it pushes it through here.
Now this blood right here-- remember, this one still is de-oxygenated blood.
De-oxygenated blood goes to the lungs to become oxygenated.
So this right here is the pulmonary-- I'm using the word pulmonary because it's going to or from the lungs.
It's dealing with the lungs.
And it's going away from the heart.
It's the pulmonary artery and it is de-oxygenated.
Then it goes to the heart, rubs up against some alveoli and then gets oxygenated and then it comes right back.
Now this right here, we're going to the heart.
So that's a vein.
It's in the loop with the lungs so it's a pulmonary vein and it rubbed up against the alveoli and got the oxygen diffused into it so it is oxygenated.
Now, the left atrium, once again, from our point of view, is on the right-hand side, but from the dude looking at it, it's his left-hand side.
So it goes into the left atrium.
Now in the left ventricle, after it's done pumping, it expands and that oxygenated blood flows into the left ventricle.
Then the left ventricle-- the ventricles are what do all the pumping-- it squeezes and then it pumps the blood into the aorta.
Why is it an artery?
Because we're going away from the heart.
Is it a pulmonary artery?
No, we're not dealing with the lungs anymore.
We dealt with the lungs when we went from the right ventricle, went to the lungs in a loop, back to the left atrium.
Now we're in the left ventricle.
We pump into the aorta.
Now this is to go to the rest of the body.
This is an artery, a non-pulmonary artery-- and it is oxygenated.
So when we're dealing with non-pulmonary arteries, we're oxygenated, but a pulmonary artery has no oxygen.
It's going away from the heart to get the oxygen.
Pulmonary vein comes from the lungs to the heart with oxygen, but the rest of the veins go to the heart without oxygen because they want to go into that loop on the pulmonary loop right there.
So I'll leave you there.
Hopefully that gives-- actually, let's go back to that first diagram.
I think you have a sense of how the heart is dealing, but let's go look at the rest of the body and just get a sense of things.
You can look this up on Wikipedia if you like.
All of these different branching points have different names to them, but you can see right here you have kind of a branching off, a little bit below the heart.
This is actually the celiac trunk.
Celiac, if I remember correctly, kind of refers to an abdomen.
So this blood that-- your hepatic artery.
Hepatic deals with the liver.
Your hepatic artery branches off of this to get blood flow to the liver.
It also gives blood flow to your stomach so it's very important in digestion and all that.
And then let's say this is the hepatic trunk.
Your liver is sitting like that.
Hepatic trunk-- it delivers oxygen to the liver.
The liver is doing respiration.
It takes up the oxygen and then it gives up carbon dioxide.
So it becomes de-oxygenated and then it flows back in and to the inferior vena cava, into the vein.
I want to make it clear-- it's a loop.
It's a big loop.
The blood doesn't just flow out someplace and then come back someplace else.
This is just one big loop.
And if you want to know at any given point in time, depending on your size, there's about five liters of blood.
And I looked it up-- it takes the average red blood cell to go from one point in the circulatory system and go through the whole system and come back, 20 seconds.
That's an average because you can imagine there might be some red blood cells that get stuck someplace and take a little bit more time and some go through the completely perfect route.
Actually, the 20 seconds might be closer to the perfect route.
I've never timed it myself.
But it's an interesting thing to look at and to think about what's connected to what.
You have these these arteries up here that they first branch off the arteries up here from the aorta into the head and the neck and the arm arteries and then later they go down and they flow blood to the rest of the body.
So anyway, this is a pretty interesting idea.
In the next video, what I want to do is talk about, how does the hemoglobin know when to dump the oxygen?
Or even better, where to dump the oxygen-- because maybe I'm running so I need a lot of oxygen in the capillaries around my thigh muscles.
I don't need them necessarily in my hands.
How does the body optimize where the oxygen is actually delivering?
It's actually fascinating.
Imagine two people who share an important secret have to split up.
This requires them to communicate private information from a distance.
However, an eavesdropper named Eve also wants this information, and has the ability to intercept their messages.
So, Alice decides to communicate using letters written in some kind of secret code.
The following analogy is helpful.
First, Alice locks her message in a box, using a lock that only she and Bob know the combination to.
This is known as 'encryption.'
Then, the locked message is sent to Bob.
When Bob receives the box, he opens it using the code they shared in advance.
This is called 'decryption.'
Cryptography begins when we abandon physical locks and use 'ciphers' instead.
Think of [ciphers] as virtual locks.
Ciphers allow Alice and Bob to scramble and descramble their messages so that they would appear meaningless if Eve intercepted them.
Cryptography has been around for thousands of years.
It has decided wars, and is at the heart of the worldwide communication network today.
The fascinating story of cryptography requires us to understand two very old ideas related to number theory and probability theory.
I learned about the Haiti earthquake by Skype.
My wife sent me a message,
"Whoa, earthquake," and then disappeared for 25 minutes.
It was 25 minutes of absolute terror that thousands of people across the U.S. felt.
I was afraid of a tsunami; what I didn't realize was there was a greater terror in Haiti, and that was building collapse.
We've all seen the photos of the collapsed buildings in Haiti.
These are shots my wife took a couple days after the quake, while I was making my way through the D.R. into the country.
This is the national palace -- the equivalent of the White House.
This is the largest supermarket in the Caribbean at peak shopping time.
This is a nurses' college -- there are 300 nurses studying.
The general hospital right next door emerged largely unscathed.
This is the Ministry of Economics and Finance.
We have all heard about the tremendous human loss in the earthquake in Haiti, but we haven't heard enough about why all those lives were lost.
We haven't heard about why the buildings failed.
After all, it was the buildings, not the earthquake, that killed 220,000 people, that injured 330,000, that displaced 1.3 million people, that cut off food and water and supplies for an entire nation.
This is the largest metropolitan-area disaster in decades, and it was not a natural disaster -- it was a disaster of engineering.
AlDG has worked in Haiti since 2007, providing engineering and business support to small businesses.
And after the quake, we started bringing in earthquake engineers to figure out why the buildings collapsed, to examine what was safe and what wasn't.
Working with MlNUSTAH, which is the U.N. mission in Haiti, with the Ministry of Public Works, with different NGOs, we inspected over 1,500 buildings.
We inspected schools and private residencies.
We inspected medical centers and food warehouses.
We inspected government buildings.
This is the Ministry of Justice.
Behind that door is the National Judicial Archives.
The fellow in the door, Andre Filitrault -- who's the director of the Center for Interdisciplinary Earthquake Engineering Research at the University of Buffalo -- was examining it to see if it was safe to recover the archives.
Andre told me, after seeing these buildings fail again and again in the same way, that there is no new research here.
There is nothing here that we don't know.
The failure points were the same: walls and slabs not tied properly into columns -- that's a roof slab hanging off the building -- cantilevered structures, or structures that were asymmetric, that shook violently and came down, poor building materials, not enough concrete, not enough compression in the blocks, rebar that was smooth, rebar that was exposed to the weather and had rusted away.
Now there's a solution to all these problems.
And we know how to build properly.
The proof of this came in Chile, almost a month later, when 8.8 magnitude earthquake hit Chile.
That is 500 times the power of the 7.0 that hit Port-au-Prince -- 500 times the power, yet only under a thousand casualties.
Adjusted for population density, that is less than one percent of the impact of the Haitian quake.
What was the difference between Chile and Haiti?
Seismic standards and confined masonry, where the building acts as a whole -- walls and columns and roofs and slabs tied together to support each other -- instead of breaking off into separate members and failing.
If you look at this building in Chile, it's ripped in half, but it's not a pile of rubble.
Chileans have been building with confined masonry for decades.
Right now, AlDG is working with KPFF Consulting Engineers,
Architecture for Humanity, to bring more confined masonry training into Haiti.
This is Xantus Daniel; he's a mason, just a general construction worker, not a foreman, who took one of our trainings.
On his last job he was working with his boss, and they started pouring the columns wrong.
He took his boss aside, and he showed him the materials on confined masonry.
He showed him, "You know, we don't have to do this wrong.
It won't cost us any more to do it the right way."
And they redid that building.
They tied the rebar right, they poured the columns right, and that building will be safe.
And every building that they build going forward will be safe.
To make sure these buildings are safe, it's not going to take policy -- it's going to take reaching out to the masons on the ground and helping them learn the proper techniques.
Now there are many groups doing this.
And the fellow in the vest there,
Craig Toten, he has pushed forward to get documentation out to all the groups that are doing this.
Through Haiti Rewired, through Build Change, Architecture for Humanity,
AlDG, there is the possibility to reach out to 30,000 -- 40,000 masons across the country and create a movement of proper building.
If you reach out to the people on the ground in this collaborative way it's extremely affordable.
For the billions spent on reconstruction, you can train masons for dollars on every house that they end up building over their lifetime.
Ultimately, there are two ways that you can rebuild Haiti; the way at the top is the way that Haiti's been building for decades.
The way at the top is a poorly constructed building that will fail.
The way at the bottom is a confined masonry building, where the walls are tied together, the building is symmetric, and it will stand up to an earthquake.
For all the disaster, there is an opportunity here to build better houses for the next generation, so that when the next earthquake hits, it is a disaster -- but not a tragedy.
(Applause)
We're on problem 48.
It says if x squared is added to x, the sum is 42.
So let's just write that out. If x squared is added to x, the sum is equal to 42.
Which of the following could be the value of x?
So essentially they just want us to solve this equation.
So the easiest way to do it is to write it as a quadratic equaling 0 and then factoring it.
      
    ,       ,       :
    --  
              ,     
           :
    
     
       ,     -           :     ,  - :
     :
   ,    -     :
-      :
    :
   -   ,  ,    ,         
 ,  , - 
    
    
   ,       ,          
   
   ,   ,          
    :
   -   
,        ,   ,     ,      - 
    - ,   
-         - ,         
   :
  ,     ,                     ,   ,       :
   ,   , 
     
   ,        
,          
 ,     ,     ,       ,          , ,     
   ,   ,     .
        ,    ,   
      .
       
     
    ,   
,     
  
,       
     ,         
   
    ,      
  , :   ,   :   ,       ,             :
      :
   :
 ,     --,  --         :
     ,     ,    ,          .
   :
     -  --  --            ,   ,     :
      parts to kind of give a big picture of things.
    ,  --,     -,   :
       ,     ,       :
      ,      -:
   ,    
   ,      :
   , --, ,     ,    ,     :
   :
      ,     -   ,  --       normally is when it goes from DNA to the ribosome.
 ,  -      :
       :
     :
        :
   :
  ,    :
    nucleole
    ,    ,    :
     , , ,  -  :
         :
  ,          ,     , ,    ,   :
      ,        :
    :
    :
             ,     -:
,    :
   ,    :
    ,     ,   ,    ,          
     ,   ,   ,     
   ,      ,       
       ,      
      
    
      :
   ,     :
 :
      :
        :    :
,        ,  
     :
,    :
 -            :
      ,     :
    :
  ,  :
   :
 ,  ,      ,     ,    :   :  
     
    ,         :
     :
 ,    ,      ,         
 ,    
 ,         
 ,     :
      ,    ,        
    
    ,    , --  ,   ,        :
  ,          :
          :
      ,    -,     ,             
   ,   -     getting-- and I drew that arrow very small-- it's     ,     ,      
       ,     
  :
    :
       
,           
   
     ,        -      ,     :
    ,     
  -            
      
And is this is going to be the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
And what you can have is mRNA coming into one side of it. mRNA can kind of come in through here.
   
   
  ,           
,      
Even though -  ,     ,     
   ,     ,           - 
     
   -  ,    
      
   ,     ,    :
                 ,       :   ,     ,           
    
     
   
  ,            
  
It's popped out a little of the membrane of the
Golgi body with it.
       
        -    ,       ,      
, ,      
   
       ,       
   
  ,          .
       ,      
            
   :
  ,     
 ,  
   
       ,  ,  ,  ,     ,      
 ,    -  ,           
      
 
           ,   ,    
   ,   -    
   
    ... 
    ,        ,    ,        ,           :   ,      
 , ,          ,       ,   ,    ,    
       
         
 -          
    ,       ,     ,      ,      :
             ,     
,     
,    ,             
,      
        
.
 ,   
   
.
      
     -    ,    
       ,    -    
      ,             , ,         
,   ,         ,    
   
 
           ,     ,     -
    
   -,     ,     ,        ,  -   ,            
  ,        
     ,   
   , ---    --         ,    
      
   
  ,     
   ,     :
      
    ,        
      -   
  ,      ,        :
      
   ,    
             ,      
          .
   '  ,    
      ,      
    ,    
    -     ,      
    ,    
      ,    ,    ,    ,      ,     
                ,            
      ,     ,        ,     
  
,    
 ,        ,       ,        
   
      
 ,       ,      
  ,          --      -   
 ,    ,       
Every day we hear tragic numbers in the news, numbers that make us feel helpless.
The death toll could rise as high as 100,000.
45,000 to 50,000 people were killed 13 million are facing severe hunger 12 million people need emergency aid Heavy monsoon rains have affected at least five million people across the country. Three million people may have been affected by the earthquake.
But what do these numbers really mean?
They are often so big they don't feel real.
But they are real, and these big numbers are made up of individual stories and individual lives.
This is the story of one number, one life, and one extraordinary boy named Joseph. This is also the story of a humanitarian environmental scandal that could have been avoided. The death toll from a cholera outbreak in Haiti passed 200 tonight and thousands more are sick.
Even modest fees for notarizing documents can add up quickly when multiplied by 5,000
In November 2011, we filed a groundbreaking case against the UN seeking clean water &amp; sanitation and compensation for Cholera victims
The Cholera case has the potential to transform the lives of all poor Haitians by forcing the UN to provide clean water which will control Cholera and other infectious diseases
Please join us in our quest for justice from the UN
We can stop Cholera's killing but we need your help and we need it now
Please consider a generous donation to IJDH
Thank you for caring about Haiti
Thank you
We're on problem 21.
Stan's solution to an equation is shown below.
All right, and I haven't looked at it yet, but let's just see what they ask us.
Which statement about Stan's solution is true?
So let's just work through it and see if he got it right or if he made a mistake.
Let's think about it how we would do it.
So if we had n plus 8 times n plus 20 is equal to 110.
So the first thing you want to do is you'd want to distribute this 8 times n plus 20.
You don't want to multiply this whole n plus 8.
Remember, you're doing order of operations, so it's multiplication first.
So you get the n plus and you distribute this 8.
So it's 8n plus 160 is equal to 110. 8 times n plus 8 times 20 is 160.
And already I see a discrepancy between ours and his.
We have n there.
We have plus 8n there.
But where he has a 20, we have 160.
He didn't distribute the 8. 8 times n plus 20 is 8n plus 160.
So that's wrong.
So he made a mistake in step 1.
Unfortunately, he got all that other work that he had to do just because of his-- it's all going to be wrong because of his mistake.
Problem 22.
When is the statement true?
The opposite of a number is less then the original number.
Well, I mean, if I have a negative number, the opposite of a negative is positive.
So it's not going to be less.
But if I positive number, then the opposite of it is negative, which is less than it.
Because a negative is less than a positive.
Or if we say that x is greater than 0, then minus x is going to be less than x.
If we say x is positive, then definitely.
You know, minus 3 is less than positive 3.
So the statement is true for positive numbers.
So that's C.
I mean we showed a case where it's true.
If I have positive 3, negative 3 is less than that.
Statement B.
The statement is always true.
Well no, if we start with negative 3, the opposite is going to be larger.
The opposite's going to be positive 3.
And D.
The statement is true for negative numbers.
No, it's not.
Negative 3, the opposite is 3.
And that's larger than negative 3.
Problem 23.
What is the y-intercept of the graph?
OK, let me see.
So 23.
They say 4x plus 2y is equal to 12.
So if you were to graph this line, not that I'm going to-- the y-intercept is when it intersects the y-axis.
So it's that point there.
It's what's this y-coordinate.
Well the x-coordinate, it's when x is equal to 0.
So it's going to be 0 comma some y-intercept.
So the easiest thing to do is say when x is equal to 0, what is y?
So when x is equal to 0, this 4 times 0 is equal to 0.
So that just becomes 0.
So you get 2y is equal to 12. y is equal to 6, and that's choice C.
All they want to know is, of this line, when x is equal to 0, what's y?
That's what the y-intercept is.
Next problem.
OK, they've drawn us a graph.
They say-- let me copy and paste this one.
OK, which inequality is shown on the graph below?
So first of all, let's figure out the equation of this line right now.
So what's its y-intercept, first of all?
So when x is equal to 0, y is equal to minus 1.
If we put it in slope y intercept form, the equation of really, any line is y is equal to mx plus b.
Where m is the slope and b is the y-intercept.
Here, when x is 0, y is negative 1.
So the y-intercept is minus 1.
So b is minus 1.
So we know that y is equal to mx minus 1.
And now we just have to figure out the slope.
And the slope is just change in y for a given change in x.
So if we say change in y for a given change in x is equal to-- let's see.
When I increase x by 2, I increase y by 1.
So change in y is 1 when the change in x is 2.
And you could say when you increase x by 4-- I'm going four spots-- I increase y by 2.
So you could have done that.
You could have said change in y over change in x is 2/4, which is also equal to 1/2.
But either way, we now know the slope.
The slope is change in y over change in x.
So the equation of the line is y is equal to 1/2 x minus 1.
That's the equation of this line.
Now they want to know what the equation of the inequality is.
So first of all, they're including-- they have this grey area and they put this line in bold.
So that means that we're including the line.
If they had drawn a dotted line here that means we're not including the line.
But since they're including the line, it's going to be either greater than or less than or equal to.
That equal to is because we're including the line.
But just think about it.
So our choices are y is greater than or equal to 1/2 x minus 1 or y is less than or equal to 1/2 x minus 1.
Now think about for any given x.
Let's say when x is equal to 2.
When x is equal to 2, if you put it into this equation you get y is equal to 0 and that's this point on the line.
Now is the grey area all y values greater than 0 or all y values less than 0?
Well clearly, it's all y values greater than 0.
It's all the y values above the y value dictated by this equation.
The equation of this inequality or this area is y is greater than 1/2 x minus 1.
And just a very easy way to eyeball it is OK, they're including the line, so I'm going to have this equal then-- it's going to either be greater than or equal to or
less than or equal to, and since it's the area above the
line it's going to be greater than or equal to.
And that is choice D.
Next problem, problem 25.
This is another one where I think it makes sense to copy and paste it.
Which best represents the graph of y id equal to 2x minus 2.
So the slope is 2.
Its positive 2 and its y-intercept is minus 2.
So the y-intercept is easy to eyeball.
Here the y-intercept is minus 2.
That's right.
Here it's minus 2 as well.
In both of these, the y-intercept is plus 2.
So neither of these are going to, right?
It intersects the y-axis at positive 2.
But we know that the y-intercept is minus 2.
So we know-- whoops.
Where'd I go? There we go.
So we know our choices are one of the top two.
It's either A or C.
And which of these has a positive slope, positive slope of 2?
Well in choice A when I go to the right by 2, I go up by 4.
So change in y over change in x.
I go up by 4, when I go up in x by 2.
I go up in y by 4 when I go up in x by 2, so the slope is 2.
So this has a positive slope of 2, so that's choice A.
But just for seeing why choice C doesn't work or figuring out the slope, think about it this way.
Let me start at a random point here.
If I increase x value by 2, what's happening to my y value?
Is it increasing by 2 or is it decreasing by 2?
Well it's decreasing.
Well it's decreasing by 4.
It's decreasing at twice the rate.
It's decreasing by 4.
So in this case, change in y over change in x.
Whenever x is positive 2, we increased by 2 here.
What happened to y.
It went down 4.
So here the slope is minus 2.
And you can look at that.
You can kind of eyeball it because it's going from the top left to the bottom right, so it's going to be a negative number.
But the easiest way I always do is to draw these arrows and say, OK, when I increase x, y is decreasing.
So that's going to be a negative slope.
Let's do it.
So the answer was A.
OK, so they're giving us another one of these where they shaded a graph.
These are good.
Thank God I have the cut and paste feature.
So once again, it'll be good just to figure out what the equation of this line is.
We could immediately say, OK, the y-intercept is 2.
And what's its slope?
When x increases by 1, what happens to y? y is going down by 3.
We figured that out. b is equal to 2.
The slope is equal to change in y over change in x.
When x increases by 1, the slope-- sorry.
The change in y is minus 3.
It goes down by 3.
So the slope is equal to minus 3.
So the equation of this line is y is equal to minus 3x plus 2. mx plus b.
And if I look at the choices, already it looks a little bit different than that, but we'll get to that.
But let's see what the inequality is.
So first of all, it's going to be either greater than or equal or less than or equal.
And we say the or equal because they filled in the line.
So let's think about it.
If we pick any x, say when x is equal to 2, then according to this equation, according to this line, y would be equal to minus 4.
Now, are we including the y's that are greater than that value as well or are we including the y's that are less than that value?
Well, we're including the ones that are less than that point for a given x.
So the shaded region is y is less than or equal to minus 3x plus 2.
And you can eyeball this.
You can kind of say, oh, this is below the graph, so it's less than or equal.
And that equal was because they shaded in the line.
If it was a dotted line it would just be less than.
Once again, this isn't the exact format that they have here.
They put all the x's and the y's on the same side, and we can do that.
Let's just add 3x to both sides of this equation and you get 3x plus y is less than or equal to.
When you add 3x on the right-hand side that just becomes 0.
So less than or equal to 2.
And that is 3x plus y is less than or equal to positive 2.
And I'm all out of time, see you in the next video.
What I want to do in this video is think about the difference between a line segment (a line segment) a line (a line), and a ray (and a ray).
And this is kind of the pure geometrical versions of these, of these, things.
And so a line segment is actually probably what most of us associate with a line in our everyday lives.
So a line segment is something just like that (for a lack of a better word) a straight
line, but why we call it a segment is that it actually has a starting and a stopping point.
So most of the lines we experience in our everyday reality are actually line segments when we think of it from a pure geometrical point of view.
And i know i drew a little bit of a curve here, but this is supposed to be completely straight.
But this is a line segment.
The segment, the segment is based on the fact that it has an ending point and a starting point, or a starting point and an ending point.
A line if you're thinking about it in the pure geometric sense of a line, is, essentially, it does not stop.
It doesn't have a starting point and an ending point.
It keeps going on forever in both directions so a
line would look like this (a line, would look like this) and to show that it keeps on going on forever in that direction right over there we draw this arrow, and to keep showing that it goes on forever in kind of the down left direction, we draw this arrow right over here.
So obviously, y-you no I've never encountered something that just keeps on going straight forever (forever), but in math (thats the neat thing about math) we can think about these abstract notions and so the mathematical purest geometric sense of a line is the straight thing that goes on forever.
Now a ray is something in between.
A ray has a well defined starting point (so that's its starting point), but then it just keeps on going on forever.
So then, so the ray might start over here, but then it just keeps on going (then it just keeps on going).
So that right over there is a ray.
Now that out of the way, let's actually try to do the Khan Academy module on recognizing the difference between line segments, lines and rays.
And i think you'll find it pretty straight forward based on, on our little classification right over here. So let me get the module, let me get the module going.
(let me, where did i put it? where did i put it? there you go!) Alright, so what is this thing right over here?
Well it has two arrows on both ends, so it's implying that it goes on forever.
So this is going to be a line.
(lets check our answer.) Yeah!
Its a line.
(now it's taking some time, oh correct, next question) Alright now what about this thing?
Wait once again arrows on both sides means that this thing is going to go on forever in both directions, so once again it is a line.
Fair enough, lets do another one.
Here, we have one arrow, so it goes on forever in this direction, but it has a well defined starting point.
So it starts there and then goes on forever.
And if you remember that's what a ray is.
One staring point but goes on forever.
So it goes, or more when you think about it, it goes on forever in only one direction.
So that is a ray.
So lets do another question.
This right over here, you have a starting point and an ending point.
Or u can call this the start point and the ending point but it doesn't go on forever in either direction. so this right over here, is a line segment.
(there you go)
So hopefully that, that gives you enough t-t-to work your way through this module.
And you might notice that when i did this (when i did this) module right here, there is no video and that's exactly what this video is, it's the video for this module.
Jobs.
Making it easier for people to find jobs and you know feed their families, pay their bills and not feel like
" Can I buy bread or do I have to buy shoes " ?
Like, there shouldn't be like, you know, you shouldn't have to think about them you should just know that I have the money and I can do this.
So definitely, jobs. Definitely.
I am because I think you kind of have to be, 'cause if you..you know you lose hope of someday it will be better then it's never gonna be better so I definitely think, I do have hope ...I have hope that whoever comes next politically it's their duty to do a better job, definitely.
I do think it's broken because I think they're more about, they're not looking at you know.. people, anymore, they looking at..you know..the businesses and the money they can make and you know..all those things, they're not looking at..like the traditional American family anymore.
There's two people that work, there's children, there's bills to pay, there's college to worry about there's groceries, there's clothing and I definitely think that if they stopped for a minute and looked and saw like what we have to go through as every day individuals they'd like "hey, we're screwing up and we really need to fix this".
So and maybe if they talked to us more instead of about what THEY want to do, what WE think needs to be done.
I think that could help.
In the last video, we learned how myosin-- and myosin II in particular-- when we say myosin II it actually has two of these myosin heads and their tails are inter-wound with each other-- how myosin II can use ATP to essentially-- you can almost imagine either pulling an actin filament or walking up an actin filament.
It starts attached.
ATP comes and bonds onto it.
That causes it to be released.
Then the ATP hydrolyzes into ADP and a phosphate group.
And when that happens, that energy's released.
It puts this into a higher energy state.
It kind of spring-loads the protein and then it attaches up another notch on the actual actin filament and then the phosphate group leaves and that's where the conformation change in this protein is enough.
It generates the power stroke to actually push on the actin filament-- and you could imagine, either move the myosin-- whatever the myosin is connected to-- to the left or whatever the actin is connected to to the right.
We're going to talk a lot more about what they're connected to in future videos.
Now, a couple of questions might have been raising in your head.
This guy had so much effort to pull on this thing, right?
There's some tension pulling in the other direction, right?
I said this is what happens in muscles, so there must be some weight or some other resistance.
So what happens when this releases?
At the first step when ATP joined and this released, wouldn't the actin filament just go back to where it was before?
Especially if there's some tension on it going in that direction.
And the simple answer to that is, this isn't the only myosin protein that's acting on this actin.
You have others all along the chain.
Maybe you have one right there.
They're all working at their own pace at different times.
So you have so many of these that when one of them is disengaged, another one of them might be in their power stroke or another one might be engaged.
So it's not like you have this notion of, if all of a sudden one lets go, that the actin filament will recoil back to where it was.
Now the next question that you might be thinking is, how do I turn on and off this situation?
We have command over our muscles.
What can turn on or off this system of the myosin essentially crawling up the actin?
And to understand that, there's two other proteins that come into effect.
That's tropomyosin and troponin.
And so I'm going to redraw the actin-- I'll do a very rough drawing of the actin filament.
Let's say that that's my actin filament right there with its little grooves.
It's actually a helical structure.
And actually, these grooves-- it's kind of a helical-- but we won't worry too much about that.
What we drew so far, at least in the last video, you had these little myosin.
You can view them as feet or head or whatever that keep attaching to it and then based on where they are in that ATP cycle, they can keep getting cranked back up or sprinr-loaded and go to the next one and push back.
Now, on top of this actin, you actually have this tropomyosin protein.
And this tropomyosin protein, it coils around the actin.
So this is our actin right here.
This is one of the two heads of the myosin Il.
And then we have our tropomyosin.
Tropomyosin is coiled around.
It's a very rough sketch, but you can imagine it's coiled around and it goes back behind it, then it goes like that, and then it goes back behind it, then it goes like that.
So it's coiled around it and the important thing about it is, if there's-- let me take a step back.
It's coiled around and it's attached to the actin by another protein called troponin.
Let's say it's attached there and-- this isn't exact, but let's say it's attached there, and there, and there, and there, and there by the troponin.
So let me write this down.
So you can imagine, the troponin is kind of like the nails into the actin.
So it dictates where the tropomyosin is.
So when a muscle is not contracting, it turns out that the tropomyosin is blocking the myosin from being able to-- and I've read a bunch of accounts on this and I think this is still an area of research.
It's not 100% clear one way or the other.
Tropomyosin is-- or maybe both-- blocking the myosin from being able to attach to the actin where it normally attaches so it won't be able to crawl up the actin-- or sometimes the myosin is attached to the actin, but it keeps it from releasing and sliding up the actin to keep that walking procedure.
So the bottom line is that this tropomyosin kind of blocks the myosin head-- this is the myosin head right there-- from crawling up the actin, either by physically blocking its actual binding site or if it's already bound, keeping it from being able to keep sliding up the actin.
Either way, it's blocking it and the only way to make it unblocked is for the troponins to actually change their conformation, for them to change their shape.
And the only way for them to change their shape is if we have a high calcium ion concentration.
So if you have a bunch of calcium ions, if you have a high enough concentration, these calcium ions are going to bond to the troponin and then that changes the conformation of the troponin enough to move the configuration of the tropomyosin.
So normally, tropomyosin blocks, but then when you have a high calcium ion concentration, they bind to troponin and then the troponin, they change their conformation so it moves the tropomyosin out of the way.
So when it moves out of the way, you have a high calcium concentration, bonds troponin, moves tropomyosin out of the way, then all of a sudden what we talked about in the last video-- these guys can start walking up the actin or pushing the actin to the right, however you want to view it.
But then if the calcium concentration goes low, then the calciums get released from the troponin.
You need to have enough to always hang around here.
If the concentration becomes really low here, these guys will start to leave.
So then the troponin goes back to, I guess, standard conformation.
That makes the tropomyosin block the myosin again.
So it's actually-- I mean, I can't say anything here is simple.
This was only discovered maybe 50 or 60 years ago and you can imagine to actually observe these things or to create experiments to definitively know what's happening-- nothing is simple, but the idea is simple.
Without calcium, the tropomyosin is blocking the ability of the myosin to attach where it needs to attach or slide up the actin so it can keep pushing on it.
But if the calcium concentration is high enough, they will bond to the troponin-- which essentially nails down the tropomyosin that's wound around the actin and when they change their conformation with the calcium ions, it moves the tropomyosin out of the way so that the myosin can do what it does.
So you can imagine already, we're building up a way for-- one, for muscles to contract, but even better, for us to control muscles to contract.
So if we have a high calcium concentration within the cell, the muscle will contract.
If we have a low calcium concentration again, then all of a sudden, these will release.
They'll be blocked, and then the muscle will relax again.
In the last video, I touched on the idea of a sigma bond.
And that was a bond-- well, let me draw two nucleuses and let me just draw one of the orbitals.
Let's say this is an sp3 hybridized orbital, and that's on this atom and this is kind of this big lobe right there.
And then this guy has an sp3 hybridized orbital as well.
That's the small lobe, and then that's the big lobe like that.
A sigma bond is one where there's an overlap kind of in the direction in which the lobes are pointed.
And you might say, well, how can there be any other type of bond than that?
Well, the other type of bond, so this right here-- let me make this clear.
This right here is a sigma bond.
And you say, well, what other kind of bond could there be where my two orbitals overlap kind of in the direction that they're pointing?
And the other type of bond you could have, you can imagine if you have two p orbitals.
So let me draw the nucleus of two atoms, and I'll just draw one of each of their p orbitals.
So let's say that that's the nucleus and I'll just draw their p orbitals.
So a p orbital is just that dumbbell shape.
Let me draw them a little bit closer together.
So a p orbital is that dumbbell shape.
So let me draw this guy's-- one of his p orbitals.
I want to draw it a little bit bigger than that, and you'll see why a second.
So one of his p orbitals right there.
It comes out like that.
And then this guy over here also has a p orbital that is parallel to this p orbital, so it goes like that.
Let me draw that other one a little bit straighter.
It goes-- I want it to overlap more, so it goes like that.
I think you get the idea.
So here, our two p orbitals are parallel to each other.
This, you can imagine, these are sp3 hybridized orbitals.
They're pointing at each other.
Here, they're parallel. p orbitals are parallel to each other, and you see that they overlap on this kind of top lobe here and in this bottom lobe here.
And this is a pi bond.
Let me make this clear.
And this is one pi bond.
So you could call it a pi, literally, with the Greek
letter pi: pi bond.
Sometimes you'll see this just written as pi bond.
And it's called a pi bond because it's the Greek letter for essentially p, and we're dealing with p orbitals overlapping.
Now sigma bonds, which are what form when you have a single bond, these are stronger than pi bonds; pi bonds come into play once you start forming double or triple bonds on top of a sigma bond.
To kind of get a better visualization of how that might work, let's think about ethene.
So it's molecular structure looks like this.
So you have C double-bonded to C, and then each of those guys have two hydrogens.
So let me draw what it would look like, or our best visual, or our best ability to kind of conceptualize what the orbitals around the carbon might look like.
So first I'll draw the sp2 hybridized orbitals.
So let me just make it very clear what's going on here.
So when we were dealing with methane, which is literally just a carbon bonded to four hydrogens, and if I actually wanted to draw it in a way that it kind of looks a little three-dimensional with a tetrahedral structure, it might look like this.
This hydrogen is pointing out a little bit.
This hydrogen is kind of in the plane of the page, and then maybe that hydrogen is behind it, and then you have one hydrogen popping up.
That's methane.
And we saw that these were all sp3 hybridized orbitals around the carbon, and then they each formed sigma bonds with each of the hydrogens.
We saw that in the last video.
And when we drew its electron configuration, in order for this to happen, carbon's electron configuration when bonding in methane needed to look like this.
It needed to look like 1s2.
And then instead of having 2s2 and then 2p2, what you essentially have is-- let me try it this way, actually, even better.
Let me write this better.
In 1s, you had two electrons, and then instead of two s's, you had two electrons and on each of the p's, you had one, the s's and the p's all got mixed up and you had a 2sp3 hybridized orbital, another 2sp3 hybridized orbital, another 2sp3 hybridized orbital, and then another one, sp3.
Normally, when carbon's sitting by itself, you would expect a 2s here, and then you'd have a 2p in the x-direction, a 2p in the y-direction, and then a 2p in the z-direction.
But we saw in the last video, they all get mixed up and they all have a 25% s-character, and a 75% p-character when carbon bonds in methane and the electrons kind of separate out in that situation.
When you're dealing with the carbons in ethene, remember, eth- is for two carbons and ene-, because we're dealing with an alkene.
We have a double bond here.
In this situation, the carbon's electron configuration when they bond in ethene looks more like this.
So you have your 1s, and the 1s orbital is still completely full.
It has two electrons in it.
But then in your 2 shell, I'll just write-- let me do this in a different color.
So in our 2 shell, I'll show you what I mean in a second.
I'm not writing the s or p's so far on purpose, but we're going to have four electrons just like we had before.
We're still forming four bonds.
We're going to have these four unpaired electrons.
We're still forming one, two, three, four bonds with each of the carbons, so they're going to be separated out.
But in this situation, instead of all of them being a mixture, kind of one part s, three parts p, the s mixes with two of the p orbitals.
So what you have is 2sp2 orbital.
So you can imagine that the s orbital mixes with two of the p orbitals.
So now it's one part s, two parts p.
And then one of the p orbitals kind of stays by itself.
And we need this p orbital to stay by itself because it is going to be what's responsible for the pi bond.
And we're going to see that the pi bond does something very interesting to the molecule.
It kind of makes it unrotatable around a bond axis.
And you'll see what I mean in a second.
So let me see if I can, in three dimensions, draw each of these carbons.
So you have-- let me do it a different color.
You have this carbon right there.
So let's say that's the nucleus.
I'll put a C there so you know which carbon we're dealing with.
And then I'll draw-- you could assume that the 1s orbital, it's really small right around the carbon.
And then you have these hybridized orbitals, The 2ps2 orbitals, and they're all going to be planar, kind of forming a triangle, or I guess maybe a peace sign on some level, but I'll try to draw it in three dimensions here.
So you have one, this is kind of coming out a little bit.
Then you have one that's going in a little bit.
And then you have-- and they have another lobe a little bit on the other side, but I'm not going to draw them.
It'll complicate it.
They still have characteristics of p, so they'll have two lobes, but one is bigger than the other.
And then you have one that's maybe going in this side.
So you can imagine that this is kind of a Mercedes sign if you drew a circle around it, on its side.
So that's this carbon right here.
And, of course, it has its hydrogens.
So you have this hydrogen there.
And so this hydrogen might be sitting right here.
It just has one electron in its 1s orbital.
You have this hydrogen up here.
It's sitting right over there.
And now let's draw this carbon.
This carbon will be sitting-- I'm drawing it pretty close together.
This carbon will be sitting right there.
He has his 1s orbital.
They have the exact same electron configuration.
He has his 1s orbital right around him, and then he has the exact same configuration.
Either of these guys, we've so far only-- or in this first guy, I've only drawn these first three.
I haven't drawn this unhybridized p orbital yet.
So I'll do that in a second.
But let me draw his bonds.
So first of all, he has this, or you could imagine, that bond right there, which would be an sp2 hybridized bond.
Let me do that in the same color.
So he has this bond right here, which would be an sp2 hybridized bond, just like that.
And notice, this is a sigma bond.
They overlap in kind of the direction that they're pointing in.
That's the best I could think about it.
And then he's got these two hydrogens, so one-- he's got this guy in the back, and then there's one in the front.
I'll draw it a little bigger so it's kind of pointing out at us, right?
And then we have this hydrogen is sitting right over here.
And these are also sigma bonds, just to be very clear about things.
This is an s orbital overlapping with an sp2 orbital, but they're kind of overlapping in the direction that they're pointed, or kind of along the direction of each other, of the two atoms.
This is a sigma bond, sigma bond, and then we have this hydrogen in the back, which is also going to form a sigma bond.
So everything I've drawn so far is a sigma bond, so that, that.
Maybe I don't want to make this picture too-- so I can just put sigma bond there, sigma bond there, sigma bond there, sigma, sigma.
So far I've drawn this bond, this bond, this bond, this bond, and this bond, all of those sigma bonds.
So, what happens to this last p orbital for each of these guys?
Well, that's going to be kind of sticking out of the plane of the Mercedes sign, is the best way I can describe it.
And let me see if I can do that in a color that I haven't done yet.
Oh, maybe this purple color.
So you can imagine a pure p orbital.
So a pure p orbital, I'm going to need to draw it even bigger than that, actually.
A pure p orbital, it normally wouldn't be that big relative to things, but I have to make them overlap.
So it's a pure p orbital that's kind of going in, maybe you can imagine, the z-axis, that the other orbitals are kind of a Mercedes sign in the x, y plane.
And now you have the z-axis going straight up and down, and those bottom two have to overlap so let me draw them bigger.
So it looks like that and it looks like that.
And they're going straight up and down.
And notice, they are now overlapping.
So this bond right here is this bond.
I could've drawn them in either way, but it's that second bond.
And so what's happening now to the structure?
So let me make it very clear.
This right here, that is a pi bond, and this right here is also-- it's the same pi bond.
It's this guy right here.
It's the second bond in the double bond.
But what's happening here?
Well, first of all, by itself it would be a weaker bond, but because we already have a sigma bond that's making these molecules come closer together, this pi bond will make them come even closer together.
So this distance right here is closer than if we were to just have a single sigma bond there.
Now, on top of that, the really interesting thing is, if we just had a sigma bond here, both of these molecules could kind of rotate around the bond axis.
They would be able to rotate around the bond axis if you just had one sigma bond there.
But since we have these pi bonds that are parallel to each other and they're kind of overlapping and they're kind of locked in to that configuration, you can no longer rotate.
If one of these molecules rotates, the other one's going to rotate with it because these two guys are locked together.
So what this pi bond does in the situation is it makes this carbon-carbon double bond-- it means that the double bonds are going to be rigid, that you can't have one molecule kind of flipping, swapping these two hydrogens, without the other one having to flip with it.
So you wouldn't be able to kind of swap configurations of the hydrogens relative to the other side.
That's what it causes.
So, hopefully, that gives you a good understanding of the difference between sigma and pi bond.
And if you're curious, when you're dealing with-- just to kind of make it clear, if we were dealing with ethyne, this is an example of ethene, but ethyne looks like this.
You have a triple bond.
And so you have each side pointing to one hydrogen.
In this case, one of these, so the first bonds, you can imagine, so these bonds are all sigma bonds.
They're actually sp hybridized.
Your 2s orbital only mixes with one of the p's, so these are sp hybrid orbitals forming sigma bonds, so all of these right here.
And then both of these-- let me do this in different color.
Both of these are pi bonds.
And if you had to imagine it, could imagine another pi bond kind of coming out of the page and another one here coming out of the page and into the page, out and into the page, and they, too, are overlapping, and you just have one hydrogen pointing out in each direction.
Maybe I'll make another video on that.
So, hopefully, you--
Two weeks ago,
I was sitting at the kitchen table with my wife Katya, and we were talking about what I was going to talk about today.
We have an 11-year-old son; his name is Lincoln.
He was sitting at the same table, doing his math homework.
And during a pause in my conversation with Katya,
I looked over at Lincoln and I was suddenly thunderstruck by a recollection of a client of mine.
My client was a guy named Will. He was from North Texas.
He never knew his father very well, because his father left his mom while she was pregnant with him.
And so, he was destined to be raised by a single mom, which might have been all right except that this particular single mom was a paranoid schizophrenic, and when Will was five years old, she tried to kill him with a butcher knife.
She was taken away by authorities and placed in a psychiatric hospital, and so for the next several years Will lived with his older brother, until he committed suicide by shooting himself through the heart.
And after that Will bounced around from one family member to another, until, by the time he was nine years old, he was essentially living on his own.
That morning that I was sitting with Katya and Lincoln, I looked at my son, and I realized that when my client, Will, was his age, he'd been living by himself for two years.
Will eventually joined a gang and committed a number of very serious crimes, including, most seriously of all, a horrible, tragic murder.
And Will was ultimately executed as punishment for that crime.
But I don't want to talk today about the morality of capital punishment.
I certainly think that my client shouldn't have been executed, but what I would like to do today instead is talk about the death penalty in a way I've never done before, in a way that is entirely noncontroversial.
I think that's possible, because there is a corner of the death penalty debate -- maybe the most important corner -- where everybody agrees, where the most ardent death penalty supporters and the most vociferous abolitionists are on exactly the same page.
That's the corner I want to explore.
Before I do that, though, I want to spend a couple of minutes telling you how a death penalty case unfolds, and then I want to tell you two lessons that I have learned over the last 20 years as a death penalty lawyer from watching well more than a hundred cases unfold in this way.
You can think of a death penalty case as a story that has four chapters.
The first chapter of every case is exactly the same, and it is tragic.
It begins with the murder of an innocent human being, and it's followed by a trial where the murderer is convicted and sent to death row, and that death sentence is ultimately upheld by the state appellate court.
The second chapter consists of a complicated legal proceeding known as a state habeas corpus appeal.
The third chapter is an even more complicated legal proceeding known as a federal habeas corpus proceeding.
And the fourth chapter is one where a variety of things can happen.
The lawyers might file a clemency petition, they might initiate even more complex litigation, or they might not do anything at all.
But that fourth chapter always ends with an execution.
When I started representing death row inmates more than 20 years ago, people on death row did not have a right to a lawyer in either the second or the fourth chapter of this story.
They were on their own.
In fact, it wasn't until the late 1980s that they acquired a right to a lawyer during the third chapter of the story.
So what all of these death row inmates had to do was rely on volunteer lawyers to handle their legal proceedings.
The problem is that there were way more guys on death row than there were lawyers who had both the interest and the expertise to work on these cases.
And so inevitably, lawyers drifted to cases that were already in chapter four -- that makes sense, of course.
Those are the cases that are most urgent; those are the guys who are closest to being executed.
Some of these lawyers were successful; they managed to get new trials for their clients.
Others of them managed to extend the lives of their clients, sometimes by years, sometimes by months.
But the one thing that didn't happen was that there was never a serious and sustained decline in the number of annual executions in Texas.
In fact, as you can see from this graph, from the time that the Texas execution apparatus got efficient in the mid- to late 1990s, there have only been a couple of years where the number of annual executions dipped below 20.
In a typical year in Texas, we're averaging about two people a month.
In some years in Texas, we've executed close to 40 people, and this number has never significantly declined over the last 15 years.
And yet, at the same time that we continue to execute about the same number of people every year, the number of people who we're sentencing to death on an annual basis has dropped rather steeply.
So we have this paradox, which is that the number of annual executions has remained high but the number of new death sentences has gone down.
Why is that?
It can't be attributed to a decline in the murder rate, because the murder rate has not declined nearly so steeply as the red line on that graph has gone down.
What has happened instead is that juries have started to sentence more and more people to prison for the rest of their lives without the possibility of parole, rather than sending them to the execution chamber.
Why has that happened?
It hasn't happened because of a dissolution of popular support for the death penalty.
Death penalty opponents take great solace in the fact that death penalty support in Texas is at an all-time low.
Do you know what all-time low in Texas means?
It means that it's in the low 60 percent.
Now, that's really good compared to the mid-1980s, when it was in excess of 80 percent, but we can't explain the decline in death sentences and the affinity for life without the possibility of parole by an erosion of support for the death penalty, because people still support the death penalty.
What's happened to cause this phenomenon?
What's happened is that lawyers who represent death row inmates have shifted their focus to earlier and earlier chapters of the death penalty story.
So 25 years ago, they focused on chapter four.
And they went from chapter four 25 years ago to chapter three in the late 1980s.
And they went from chapter three in the late 1980s to chapter two in the mid-1990s.
And beginning in the mid- to late 1990s, they began to focus on chapter one of the story.
Now, you might think that this decline in death sentences and the increase in the number of life sentences is a good thing or a bad thing.
I don't want to have a conversation about that today.
All that I want to tell you is that the reason that this has happened is because death penalty lawyers have understood that the earlier you intervene in a case, the greater the likelihood that you're going to save your client's life.
That's the first thing I've learned.
Here's the second thing I learned:
My client Will was not the exception to the rule; he was the rule.
I sometimes say, if you tell me the name of a death row inmate -- doesn't matter what state he's in, doesn't matter if I've ever met him before --
I'll write his biography for you.
And eight out of 10 times, the details of that biography will be more or less accurate.
And the reason for that is that 80 percent of the people on death row are people who came from the same sort of dysfunctional family that Will did.
Eighty percent of the people on death row are people who had exposure to the juvenile justice system.
That's the second lesson that I've learned.
Now we're right on the cusp of that corner where everybody's going to agree.
People in this room might disagree about whether Will should have been executed, but I think everybody would agree that the best possible version of his story would be a story where no murder ever occurs. How do we do that?
When our son Lincoln was working on that math problem two weeks ago, it was a big, gnarly problem.
And he was learning how, when you have a big old gnarly problem, sometimes the solution is to slice it into smaller problems.
That's what we do for most problems -- in math, in physics, even in social policy -- we slice them into smaller, more manageable problems.
But every once in a while, as Dwight Eisenhower said, the way you solve a problem is to make it bigger.
The way we solve this problem is to make the issue of the death penalty bigger.
We have to say, all right. We have these four chapters of a death penalty story, but what happens before that story begins?
How can we intervene in the life of a murderer before he's a murderer?
What options do we have to nudge that person off of the path that is going to lead to a result that everybody -- death penalty supporters and death penalty opponents -- still think is a bad result: the murder of an innocent human being?
You know, sometimes people say that something isn't rocket science.
And by that, what they mean is rocket science is really complicated and this problem that we're talking about now is really simple.
Well that's rocket science; that's the mathematical expression for the thrust created by a rocket.
What we're talking about today is just as complicated.
What we're talking about today is also rocket science.
My client Will and 80 percent of the people on death row had five chapters in their lives that came before the four chapters of the death penalty story.
I think of these five chapters as points of intervention, places in their lives when our society could've intervened in their lives and nudged them off of the path that they were on that created a consequence that we all -- death penalty supporters or death penalty opponents -- say was a bad result.
Now, during each of these five chapters: when his mother was pregnant with him; in his early childhood years; when he was in elementary school; when he was in middle school and then high school; and when he was in the juvenile justice system -- during each of those five chapters, there were a wide variety of things that society could have done.
In fact, if we just imagine that there are five different modes of intervention, the way that society could intervene in each of those five chapters, and we could mix and match them any way we want, there are 3,000 -- more than 3,000 -- possible strategies that we could embrace in order to nudge kids like Will off of the path that they're on.
So I'm not standing here today with the solution.
But the fact that we still have a lot to learn, that doesn't mean that we don't know a lot already.
We know from experience in other states that there are a wide variety of modes of intervention that we could be using in Texas, and in every other state that isn't using them, in order to prevent a consequence that we all agree is bad. I'll just mention a few.
I won't talk today about reforming the legal system.
That's probably a topic that is best reserved for a room full of lawyers and judges.
Instead, let me talk about a couple of modes of intervention that we can all help accomplish, because they are modes of intervention that will come about when legislators and policymakers, when taxpayers and citizens, agree that that's what we ought to be doing and that's how we ought to be spending our money.
We could be providing early childhood care for economically disadvantaged and otherwise troubled kids, and we could be doing it for free.
And we could be nudging kids like Will off of the path that we're on.
There are other states that do that, but we don't.
We could be providing special schools, at both the high school level and the middle school level, but even in K-5, that target economically and otherwise disadvantaged kids, and particularly kids who have had exposure to the juvenile justice system.
There are a handful of states that do that;
Texas doesn't.
There's one other thing we can be doing -- well, there are a bunch of other things -- there's one other thing that I'm going to mention, and this is going to be the only controversial thing that I say today.
We could be intervening much more aggressively into dangerously dysfunctional homes, and getting kids out of them before their moms pick up butcher knives and threaten to kill them.
If we're going to do that, we need a place to put them.
Even if we do all of those things, some kids are going to fall through the cracks and they're going to end up in that last chapter before the murder story begins, they're going to end up in the juvenile justice system.
And even if that happens, it's not yet too late.
There's still time to nudge them, if we think about nudging them rather than just punishing them.
There are two professors in the Northeast -- one at Yale and one at Maryland -- they set up a school that is attached to a juvenile prison.
And the kids are in prison, but they go to school from eight in the morning until four in the afternoon.
Now, it was logistically difficult.
They had to recruit teachers who wanted to teach inside a prison, they had to establish strict separation between the people who work at the school and the prison authorities, and most dauntingly of all, they needed to invent a new curriculum because you know what?
People don't come into and out of prison on a semester basis. (Laughter)
But they did all those things.
Now, what do all of these things have in common?
What all of these things have in common is that they cost money.
Some of the people in the room might be old enough to remember the guy on the old oil filter commercial.
He used to say, "Well, you can pay me now or you can pay me later."
What we're doing in the death penalty system is we're paying later.
But the thing is that for every 15,000 dollars that we spend intervening in the lives of economically and otherwise disadvantaged kids in those earlier chapters, we save 80,000 dollars in crime-related costs down the road.
Even if you don't agree that there's a moral imperative that we do it, it just makes economic sense.
I want to tell you about the last conversation that I had with Will.
It was the day that he was going to be executed, and we were just talking.
There was nothing left to do in his case.
And we were talking about his life.
And he was talking first about his dad, who he hardly knew, who had died, and then about his mom, who he did know, who was still alive. And I said to him,
"I know the story. I've read the records.
I know that she tried to kill you."
I said, "But I've always wondered whether you really actually remember that."
I said, "I don't remember anything from when I was five years old.
Maybe you just remember somebody telling you."
And he looked at me and he leaned forward, and he said, "Professor," -- he'd known me for 12 years, he still called me Professor.
He said, "Professor, I don't mean any disrespect by this, but when your mama picks up a butcher knife that looks bigger than you are, and chases you through the house screaming she's going to kill you, and you have to lock yourself in the bathroom and lean against the door and holler for help until the police get there," he looked at me and he said,
"that's something you don't forget."
I hope there's one thing you all won't forget: In between the time you arrived here this morning and the time we break for lunch, there are going to be four homicides in the United States.
We're going to devote enormous social resources to punishing the people who commit those crimes, and that's appropriate because we should punish people who do bad things.
But three of those crimes are preventable.
If we make the picture bigger and devote our attention to the earlier chapters, then we're never going to write the first sentence that begins the death penalty story.
Thank you.
(Applause)
we're used to seeing things from a particular point of view that is from a particular frame of reference and things look different to us under different circumstances at the moment
you look to queue here you're upside down you're the ones upside down no europe turns out well not he's the one that's upside down his name well let's talk for a
hi you lose people want to really up that that you better come into my frame of reference now
frame of reference was inverted from what it usually is that view of things would be normal for me if i normally walk to my friends this represents a frame of reference just three route that together so that peace is at right angles to the other two now i'm going to move in this direction if either plane at the same spot on your screen but you know i'm moving that way because you see the wall moving that way behind me but how do you know that i'm not that i think bill and the wall moving workable now the wallet that the pier and you have no way of telling whether imovie or not but now you know that i'm moving the point of it is that all motions it's relative in both cases i was moving relative to the wall and the wall with moving relative to me all motion is relative but we tend to think of one thing is being fixed and the other thing has been moving we usually think of the earth inspect and walls are usually pick to beer so perhaps you were the part of the first time when it was the wallet was moving and not doctor whom a frame of reference text of the earth is the most common frame of reference in which to observe the motion of other things that is the frame of reference that you're used to the framers baton to the table the table is bolted to the floor the florida anchored in the building and the building at firmly attached to the earth of course the reason for having three rods if the position uh... any object such as this fall can be specified using these three reference line this reference line points in the direction which we called up two different directions here than it is on the other side of the air and these two reference lines specify a plane which we call horizontal or level in this film we're going to look at the motion of object in this third frame of reference and other frames of reference moving in different ways relative to the other frame well let's look at a motion this field ball can be held are by the electra mode no i'm going to open the switch and you watch the motions of the ball the ball is accelerated straight down by gravity along the line parallel to this vertical reference blood as you can see the electromagnetic mounted on the cockpit can move i'm going to do exactly the same experiment the doc resume did but this time while a cart is moving at a constant velocity is pulled along by spring which is longer on this photograph turntable and that hold that with a constant velocity when the car passes this line be lol this week that you can see i'm going to start the cart down at the end of the table so that by the time it gets to this point by can be sure it's moving with a constant velocity i want you to watch right here so that you will see the ball falling
i think you can see that the ball landed in exactly the same position of the did before when doctor whom did the experiment with the car text but this time the ball could not have fallen straight down let me show you off the ball was released at that point if it had fallen straight down because the cart moves on in the time to take the fall would have landed back here somewhere but it didn't wanted to do the experiment again best time i'm going to let you watch the motion through slow-motion camera which is fixed the cart moves by the ball will fall and you can watch a missile which the camera
how true this again first-time there'll be a line on the film so if you can see the fat repeatedly complete but the problem all to the ground all of this has been in a frame of reference fixed to the year all of this motion locked in a frame of reference which was moving along with the car frame of reference like that well so that you can see what it looks like i'm going through solution camera so that it was with the car permittivity experiment again incidently i started and the number to stand here when the ball for all of you will have something which is fixed as a reference point
in their moving frame of reference i think you can see but the problem all as a political straight line it looks exactly the same as the day before when doctor whom did the experiment with the car etc if we were moving along in this frame of reference and we couldn't see the surroundings then we wouldn't be able to tell by this experiment that we were moving at a constant velocity as a matter of fact we wouldn't be able to tell by any experiment that we were moving at a constant velocity i'm gonna do the experiment once more and this time i'm not going to stand here behind the ball at the fall so that you won't have any fixed repertoire
as far as you're concerned that time the karke wasn't necessarily moving at all that time when you couldn't see the background then i think perhaps it was harder for you to realize that you were in moving frame of reference important thing to realize here all frames of reference moving at constant velocity with respect to one another are equivalent doctor ivy showed you but the motion of the ball that was released from the moving karte looked like in the current frame of reference and in the car frame the motion looks simpler from a car now i want you to watch the motion white spot would probably be the clock moving out circle
but that is what it's practiced actually like in the hurt of reference this is your normal frame of reference you father thought moving in the circle because you're high moved along with the car you put yourself in the frame of reference of the moving truck so if it isn't always true that we view motion from the third frame of reference when the motion is simpler from the moving frame you automatically put yourself and not moving frame now we're going to do another experiment on a relative motion to show how the compare the block today of an object in one printer records to explore all serbian another frame of reference forgiveness drive a spark a certain stark it moves a straight across the table with a speed which is essentially constant because the forces of friction of the made very small this is just the law of inertia an object moves the constant velocity unless an unbalanced force acts on it how you get the same start backwards uh... dougherty and gives it the same started moves back in this direction with the same philosophy now we're on a car here a car which can move in which were you going to move in this direction and we're going to repeat the experiment all right let's go
if we were making measurements here then we would observe the same but lots of these that is the same experimental results that we did before and so would you because you are observing this experiment through with the camera which is fast into this car added you were in the moving frame of reference but now we're going to do the experiment again and this time you watched through a camera which is fixed in the poor frame of reference or concentrate on watching the clock to lecture i follow us i think you'll see that in a move faster that way and not so bad this way relative to u_n_ relative to the wall husband
here the car which was moving along in this direction with the velocity we were thinking on the card at a table here i am over on the side and uh... doctor doom was on the side and we were pushing back-and-forth on the table well i pushed it and went into this direction with the velocity v when doctor didn't want to do when in this direction the same velocity v but this is the velocity relative to the car what about the velocity relative to an observer on the ground in the picture brain well if it was pushed in this direction it's velocity to you plot being if it's in this direction it will also be used u minded b this is all very reasonable is nothing very hard to understand here the surprising thing about this expression is that it is not actor in all circumstances at very high speed by high speed i mean speeds close to the velocity of light expression breakdown at these very high speed we have to use the ideas about relative motion developed by a albert einstein in his special theory of relativity for all the speed of the we're ever likely to run into this expression you plus or minus the is completely adequate so far we've been talking about frames of reference moving at a constant velocity relative to one another now i'm going to do the experiment with the dropping ball again only that time the karte will be accelerated relative to the earth frame these weight will fall and give the cart a constant acceleration first of all out and then i'll really put the motion is very fast and i want you to watch at the point where the ball is released from the pic camera i don't know whether you thought that are not at the top of the vault with the things that was before for either prime it landed in a different spots this is because the cart kept on accelerating in this direction as the ball was falling now i'm going to let you see it again with the slow-motion camera fixed on to the car
this time you saw the bull moving off to one side falling down the vertical reference line as it did in the constant velocity case but suppose you were in the six telerate a frame of reference how could you explain this gravity is the only force acting on this fall so it should fall straight down but at the law of inertia is to hold there must be a farce pushing sideways on the ball in this direction accorded to deviate from the vertical path but what kind of a force is it it is not gravitational or an electric or nuclear force in fact it is in the force at all as we know what story left to conclude but it gets sensor is no force that could be pushing in this direction on the ball but the law governorship just does not hold this is a strange frame of reference we call a frame of reference in which the law of inertia holes and inertial the law how the nurse or holds in the third frame of reference so it is an inertial frame the car moving at constant velocity relative to the earth is an inertial frame but the car which is expel a rated is not an inertial frame because the frame of reference that we're used to living in is one in which the law of inertia holds when we go into a non inertial
like the frame of the accelerated car our belief in the lava nurture is so strong but when we feed them acceleration of the ball sideways we think there is a port carpet so we make fiction but they're into force and sometimes we call this fictitious force fictitious forces arise an accelerated frames of reference the frame is accelerated in this direction so you in the frame cn acceleration of the ball in this direction and you say that there is a force cutting it
what's happening this time why doesn't the talking straight across the table i did it before how you can see it doesn't if we believe in the law of inertia but we must believe that there is an unbalanced force to change the velocity of the pot but this pope is nearly friction locks so what can be exerting this unbalanced correspondent though that you watched the motion this time through a camera which is fixed in the earth's frame of reference
i think if you concentrate on watching dot papa you can't be that it is a warning is a great time and that therefore there is no i'm not quite acting on it
now we're going to stop this rotation but i can talk to you about what is happening here i don't know about you but i'm busy in d fixed fame of reference there was no one balanced force within the frame of reference for taking in this turntable there was and unbalanced because the velocity kept changing was with the fictitious part rotating plane is unknown inertial or accelerated fame just as the accelerated frame of the karte the doctor humes showed you you know that every object which is moving in a circle has an acceleration toward the center of the circle this is the exploration of has a special namely and capital acceleration now you will this puck for a while workstudy while the turntable is rotating i'll get off theoretic i'm ready but the rotation
you concede that now the park isn't moving in a circle dr humans exerting a force to keep it moving in the circle and you can see this from the fact that the rubber ring is extended heat is exerting the center of the billboards and this is the only horizontal force acting on the part but not let's look at it again from his point of view in the rotating system he is exerting a force towards the center of the table and yet the puck is standing still produced more or less taylor some vibration how he believes in a lot of inertia so he thinks there's and equal parts on the part away from the center of the table so that there is no unbalanced boring this outward force in the pocket the fictitious sports in this case sometimes it's called the centrifugal force in the pics reference frame there is no award boris on the path now suppose the doctor doom stops exerting a barge watch the pot in the picture frame of reference the puck moves off in a straight line there's no no unbalanced boris acting on it now let's look at it again from his point of view in the rotating system when he releases the proc which to him was everest it mood the force away from the sender is now on unbalanced part on the talked to him the outward course on the part is fictitious in our food frame of reference it doesn't think that's but the doctor whom in the accelerated frame of reference it's a perfectly real force i hope by now doctor i do not have convinced you the rotating frame of reference is not in their shel frame for you've all been told that the hurt it's rotating abode of taxes and that also it travels in a nearly circular orbit around the time why then do we find in a frame of reference attached securely to the earth but the law of inertia seems to hold why don't we observed fictitious forces the five of the fictitious forces which we have to introduce in a non initial frame depends upon the acceleration of the frame these smaller the acceleration is v smaller the fictitious forces that we introduced here's a frame of reference attached to the equator of the car the acceleration of this frame is really very small because bearded spinning about it axis it has an acceleration directly inward app three d_ one hundred of a major per second square on they one kilogram at the equator their is the fictitious for us directly upwards out three one hundred but this is not by gravity which is a port downward of nine point eight new so the net downward force is smaller than that of gravity alone if i've dropped av one kilogram at the equator the acceleration would be slightly smaller than that due to gravity alone very much now the acceleration of the car in its orbit is even smaller still and produces even smaller affect in our frame of reference mike said that the earth was rotating abode faxes how do we know but this is slow well if you take a time exposure photograph of the stars they seem to be moving in circles a both p pole star but all motion is relative is there any way of telling which is moving or the stars the fact that it is because which is rotating can be demonstrated by means of the pendulum if i've got a pendulum swinging its wings back-and-forth in a plane though it turns out is this pendulum with the north pole of the art the plane of swing would remain fixed relative to the stars but would rotate relative now i'll have to show you what i need this pendulum is epicenter how this turntable which will represent europe no i was about the cable turning around in this direction i'll put a black arrow on so that you'll remember but the rotation the pendulum is that the north pole of the earth annuals motion as you ordinarily do standing on the earth the playing of swing rotates in the opposite direction from the rotation of the turntable and that exactly the same rate now look at it from the fixed cabral which will represent the frame of the stars the turntable the alert rotate but the plane of the pendulum remain specs a pendulum used for this purpose because approval pendulum use tommy dot wong at the beginning of this film
let's look back again now the focal pendulum dropped slammed as its wings i think you can see the paint line where the planned trail began the amplitude upswing is decreasing the famed trail is not long now but the important thing to speak is that the plane upswing has been rotating during the half hour that we've been talking to you an inertial frame of reference is one in which the alarm inner cities without all frames of reference moving at a constant velocity with respect to an inertial frame are also inertial frame we use the word as an inertial frame of reference but it is only approximately one a small acceleration with respect to the stars for example the frame of reference other stars is the best we can do when we look for a frame of reference which is for all practical purposes bextra accelerated frame of reference is not a member shall frame and when we are in an accelerated frame we have to introduce forces which we called fictitious forces in order that the law of inertia and the other laws of physics don't change
The most important issue, no doubt about it, is controlling inflation and getting people jobs.
Those are absolutely paramount and you've got to have it or you can't do it.
Because that's what the government's suppose to do is try to supply jobs and keep inflation down.
Otherwise it's not suppose to be involved in everybody's moral issues.
My future's limited so I'm hopeful about my own future of two, three or four years, but I'm not real hopeful about the future in five, ten, twenty or fifteen years.
Interviewer:
Why not?
Because inflation's taking all the money out and government is sending all the jobs to other places.
Without jobs and with wars going on all the time you're finished.
There's no doubt the political system is broken and I don't know if it's fixable with the present people you have around.
You need moral people and people with reasoning powers and thinking powers and they don't lie.
And I don't think we have too many of those in government.
Unfortunate, but you can only fix if people want to fix it.
I think all the candidates are about the same.
I think they're like cars. They all look the same.
They sound the same and they bring out the same result.
They try to do things promising what they can't deliver
say "Hey, this is going to be a 2".
But what we'll do in this video is to think How to troubleshoot these problems systematically. Because what we'll find is that as more and more complicated are these equations, you will not be able to simply think about them and do them in your head
So it is very important that you first understand how manipulate these equations, but even more important is understand what they really represent
This literally just says 7 times x equals fourteen
In algebra, do not write "times" ali
When you write two numbers side-by-side or a number close a variable like this, that means you are multiplying
Now that have a basic understanding of what a ratio is, let's see if we can tackle some more advanced problems.
So, I have a classroom.
It's got fifty-five students in it. fifty-five students.
And I also know that the ratio of boys to girls, the ratio of
I'll write it this way, boys to girls is four:seven.
What I want to know is, how many girls do I need to add.
So, how many girls need to add, or do I need to add, do I need to add, for the ratio, for the ratio to become one:two. one:two.
And this is the ratio of boys to girls.
I'm not switching the ratio on you.
So, right now for every four boys, I have seven girls.
I want to add some girls so that the ratio becomes for every boy, I have two girls.
So how can you do this?
Well, just going back to the basic ratio video, the first thing we can do we, know the total number of students.
And we know the ratio.
So maybe it'll help us to figure out the number of boys and girls we have right now.
So our current ratio is four:seven.
So boys, boys, to girls, right now is equal to four:seven.
That means -- what does that mean?
That means for every, if you add up these two.
For every eleven students there are four boys and seven girls.
There are four boys, four boys and seven girls.
That's what this ratio tells us.
You give me eleven students of this -- you could split this classroom into a bunch of groups.
And for every group of eleven, you're going to have four boys and seven girls that's all that tells me.
For every eleven students, four boys and seven girls.
If you split them, every group has the same number of boys and girls.
Now, how many groups of eleven students there are?
So there are fifty-five students.
We have fifty-five students total.
And we're breaking them into groups of eleven.
And every group will have the same number of boys and of girls.
So we have eleven groups.
Sorry, if we divide by eleven students per group.
Students per group.
So how many groups of eleven students do we have?
That means we have five groups of eleven students. five groups of eleven students.
And we've done this drill before.
Every group has four boys and it has seven girls.
So we have five groups. five groups each of them has four boys, that means we have five times four, which is equal to twenty boys.
And we have five times seven, we have five groups, five times seven, each group has seven girls.
Of girls.
So that's equal to thirty-five girls.
And the numbers add up. twenty plus thirty-five is fifty-five.
And twenty to thirty-five, twenty to thirty-five, is equal to four:seven.
So it all works out.
So that's what we have right now.
Now, we're going to add to girls to the classroom to change the ratio.
So let's do this.
So right now we have twenty boys.
We have twenty boys.
And we have thirty-five girls.
We just figure that out.
And I'm going to add some girls to the classroom.
So I'm going to add some girls to the classroom And my new ratio, after I add these g girls to the classroom, my new ratio is going to be one:two. one:two.
So I have an equation I have one unknown, I can just solve for it.
You can almost do this one in your head. twenty is to what, one is to two as twenty as to what?
You could say, oh, twenty is -- one is one / two of twenty, twenty is one / two of forty.
So you could say, oh, it's forty.
So g would be equal to five.
That's how you would solve it in your head.
If you want to do it algebraically, you could cross-multiply.
So you get thirty-five plus g times one.
So you get thirty-five plus g is equal to two times twenty.
Is equal to forty, which is essentially what we did in our head.
We said, hey, this thing has to be equal to forty.
So, if you subtract thirty-five from both sides, you get g is equal to five.
So if you add five girls to your classroom, you're going to have forty girls.
So then you'd have forty girls.
And you have twenty boys.
And your ratio is twenty:forty, which is two:four, which is the same thing is one:two.
And we've done our problem.
Two corrections I want to make to the video on the sodium potassium pump.
One very minor one-- and I don't think it would trip too many of you guys up, but near the end of the video, as we learned, we have potassium getting pumped into the cell by the sodium potassium pump.
Let me draw the membrane.
It'll actually be useful in the more significant correction I'd like to make.
So let me draw a cross section of a cell membrane.
And let me draw the sodium potassium pump right here.
We saw it pumps out three sodiums for every two potassiums that it pumps in.
It definitely doesn't look like that, but it gives the idea.
And we're pumping potassium ions in-- so K plus-- and we're pumping sodium ions out-- and that's what the whole point of that video was.
When this thing changes shape with ATP, it pumps the sodium ions out.
Now the minor correction I want to make-- and I don't think it would have tripped you up too much-- is near the end of that video, I drew the potassium ions-- and I wrote a
K plus, but a few times near the end of the video, I referred to them as sodium ions-- and I don't want that to confuse you at all.
It is potassium ions that are getting pumped in.
Two potassium ions get pumped in for every three sodium ions that get pumped out.
So I don't want-- even thought I drew a K plus, sometimes I said sodium by accident.
Don't want that to confuse you.
That is the minor error.
The more significant error is that I said that the main reason that we had this potential difference-- why it is more positive on the outside than the inside-- so this is less positive.
I said that the main reason was because of this ratio.
We're pumping out three sodium ions for every two potassium ions that we pump in.
And I just got a very nice letter from a professor of physiology, Steven Baylor at University of Pennsylvania, and he wrote a very interesting email and it corrects me.
And it's a very interesting thing to think about in general.
So here's what he wrote and let's think about what he's saying.
He says:
Here at Penn Medical School, we have a nice teaching program that stimulates the ion fluxes across a generic cell, --So the ion flux is just the movement of the ions across the membrane-- including that due to the sodium potassium pump and that which arises from the resting permeabilities of the membrane.
So the resting permeabilities is how easy it is for these ions to go through the membrane.
And we'll talk more about that in a second.
And the resting permeabilities of the membrane to sodium, potassium, chloride, et cetera.
One option our program gives students is to change the pump stoichiometry from three to two.
So when he's talking about pump stoichiometry from three to two, he's just talking about they're changing the ratios.
So they change it from 3:2 to 2:2.
So what that means is, they have a simulation program that says, well, what if the sodium potassium pump, instead of pumping three sodiums out for every two potassium it pumps in, what if it was even?
What if it was two sodiums and two potassiums?
And based on my explanation of why we have this potential difference, that should not lead to a potential difference if the main reason was the stoichiometry-- the ratio of sodium being pumped to the potassium being pumped in.
But he goes on to say: They could change it to 2:2 in the simulation.
As a result of this maneuver, the membrane potential changes from its normal value of about -80 millivolts-- and they measure that.
They take the voltage here minus the voltage there so that you get a negative number.
This is more positive.
It's a larger number.
So it changes from -80 millivolts to about -78 millivolts.
So what he's saying is, if you change this from three and two-- three sodiums for every two potassiums that get pumped in-- if you change that to 2:2, it actually doesn't change the potential that much.
You still have a more positive environment outside than you have inside.
So that leads to the question-- then why do we have the potential if the stoichiometry of this ratio is not the main cause?
So it says, it changes a little bit.
The potential difference becomes a little bit less.
The cell swells a few percentage and then everything stabilizes.
So then he goes on to write: So while it is true that the normal stoichiometry of the pump does have a slight negative influence on the membrane potential-- that's just the membrane potential, the voltage across the membrane-- the imbalance in the pump stoichiometry is not the main reason for the large negative membrane potential of the cell.
Rather, the main-- let me underline this-- the main reason is the concentration gradients established by the pump in combination with the fact that the resting cell membrane is highly permeable to potassium and only slightly permeable to sodium.
So we said in the last video-- or the first video on the sodium potassium pump-- we said there were channels that the sodium could go through and there's also channels that the potassium could go through.
And now what he's saying is that the main cause of the potential difference isn't this ratio, it's the fact that the membrane is highly permeable to potassium.
So this is very permeable.
Potassium can get out if it wants to, much easier than it is for sodium to get in.
So what that happens-- even if this was a 2:2 ratio-- it's actually a 3:2, but even if this was a 2:2 ratio, even though this environment is more positive, you're just more likely to have to potassium ions down here bump in just the right way to get across and get to the other side, go against its chemical gradient, right, because you have a higher concentration of potassium here than over here.
So you're more likely to have a potassium bump in just the right way to get through this channel and get out-- than you are to have a sodium be able to go the opposite direction.
And that's what makes this environment.
So you have more potassium coming outside because of this permeability than sodium coming inside-- and that's the main cause of the potential difference between the outside and the inside.
And so thank you, Steven Baylor, for that correction.
Very interesting.
I think we have a decent idea of how a signal is transmitted along the neuron.
We saw that a couple of dendrites, maybe that one and that one and that one, might get excited or triggered.
And when we say it gets triggered, we're saying that some type of channel gets opened.
That's probably the trigger.
That channel allows ions to be released into the cell-- or actually, there are situations where ions can be released out of the cell.
It would be inhibitory, but let's take the case where ions are released into the cells in an electrotonic fashion.
It changes the charge or the voltage gradient across the membrane and if the combined effects of the change in the voltage gradient is just enough at the axon hillock to meet that threshold, then the sodium channels over here will open up, sodium floods in, and then we have the situation where the voltage becomes very positive.
Potassium channels open up to change things again, but by the time we went very positive, then that eletrotonically affects the next sodium pump.
But then we have the situation where that will allow sodium ions to flood in and then the signal keeps getting transmitted.
Now the next natural question is, what happens at the neuron to neuron junctions?
We said that this dendrite gets triggered or gets excited.
In most cases, it's getting triggered or excited by another neuron.
It could be something else.
And over here, when this axon fires, it should be exciting either another cell.
It could be a muscle cell or-- in probably most cases of the human body-- it's exciting another neuron.
And so how does it do that?
So this is the terminal end of the axon.
There could be the dendrite of another neuron right here.
This would trigger the dendrite right there.
So the question is, how does that happen?
How does the signal go from one neuron's axon to the next neuron's dendrite?
It actually always doesn't have to go from axon to dendrite, but that's the most typical.
You can actually go from axon to axon, dendrite to dendrite, axon to soma-- but let's just focus on axon to dendrite because that's the most traditional way that neurons transmit information from one to the other.
So let's zoom in.
Let's zoom in right here.
This little box right there, let's zoom at the base, the terminal end of this axon and let's zoom in on this whole area.
Then we'll also zoom in-- we're also going to get the dendrite of this next neuron-- and I'm going to rotate it.
Actually, I don't even have to rotate it.
So to do that, let me draw the terminal end.
So let's say the terminal end looks something like this.
I'm zoomed in big time.
Something like that This is the terminal end of the neuron.
This is inside the neuron and then the next dendrite-- let me draw it right here.
So we've really zoomed in.
So this is the dendrite of the next neuron.
This is inside the first neuron.
So we have this action potential that keeps traveling along.
Eventually for maybe right over here-- I don't know if you can zoom in-- which would be over here, the action potential makes the electrical potential or the voltage potential across this membrane just positive enough to trigger this sodium channel.
So actually, maybe I'm really close.
This channel is this one right here.
So then it allows a flood of sodium to enter the cell.
You have potassium that can then take it out, but by the time this comes in, this positive charge, it can trigger another channel and it could trigger another sodium channel if there's other sodium channels further down, but near the end of the axon there are actually calcium channels.
I'll do that in pink.
So this is a calcium channel that is traditionally closed.
So this is a calcium ion channel.
Calcium has a plus 2 charge.
It tends to be closed, but it's also voltage gated.
When the voltage gets high enough, it's very similar to a sodium gated or a sodium voltage gated channel is that if it becomes positive enough near the gate, it will open up and when it opens up, it allows calcium ions to flood into the cell.
So the calcium ions, their plus 2 charge, to flood into the cells.
Now you're saying, hey Sal, why are calcium ions flooding into the cells?
These have positive charge.
I just thought you said that the cell is becoming positive because of all the sodium flowing in.
Why would this calcium want to flow in?
And the reason why it wants to flow in is because the cell also-- just like it pumps out sodium and pumps in potassium, the cell also has calcium ion pumps and the mechanism is nearly identical to what I showed you on the sodium potassium pump, but it just deals with calcium.
So you literally have these proteins that are sitting across the membrane.
This is a phospobilipid layer membrane.
Maybe I'll draw two layers here just so you realize it's a bi-layer membrane.
Let me draw it like that.
That makes it look a little bit more realistic, although the whole thing is not very realistic.
And this is also going to be a bilipid membrane.
You get the idea, but let me just do it to make the point clear.
So there are also these calcium ion pumps that are also subsets of ATPases, which they're just like the sodium potassium pumps.
You give them one ATP and a calcium will bond someplace else and it'll pull apart the phosphate from the ATP and that'll be enough energy to change the confirmation of this protein and it'll push the calcium out.
Essentially, what was the calcium will bond and then it'll open up so the calcium can only exit the cell.
It's just like the sodium potassium pumps, but it's good to know in the resting state, you have a high concentration of calcium ions out here and it's all driven by ATP.
A much higher concentration on the outside than you have on the inside and it's driven by those ion pumps.
So once you have this action potential, instead of triggering another sodium gate, it starts triggering calcium gates and these calcium ions flood into the terminal end of this axon.
Now, these calcium ions, they bond to other proteins.
And before I go to those other proteins, we have to keep in mind what's going on near this junction right here.
And I've used the word synapse already-- actually, maybe I haven't.
The place where this axon is meeting with this dendrite, this is the synapse.
And this neuron right here, this is called the presynaptic neuron.
It's good to have a little terminology under our belt.
This is the post-synaptic neuron.
And the space between the two neurons, between this axon and this dendrite, this is called the synaptic cleft.
It's a really small space in the terms of-- so what we're going to deal with in this video is a chemical synapse.
In general, when people talk about synapses, they're talking about chemical synapses.
There also are electrical synapses, but I won't go into detail on those.
This is kind of the most traditional one that people talk about.
So your synaptic cleft in chemical synapses is about 20 nanometers, which is really small.
If you think about the average width of a cell as about 10 to 100 microns-- this micron is 10 to the minus 6.
This is 20 times 10 to the minus 9 meters.
So this is a very small distance and it makes sense because look how big the cells look next to this small distance.
So it's a very small distance and you have-- on the presynaptic neuron near the terminal end, you have these vesicles.
Remember what vesicles were.
These are just membrane bound things inside of the cell.
So you have these vesicles.
They also have their phospobilipid layers, their little membranes.
So you have these vesicles so these are just-- you can kind of view them as containers.
I'll just draw one more just like that.
And they can train these molecules called neurotransmitters and I'll draw the neurotransmitters in green.
So they have these molecules called neurotransmitters in them.
You've probably heard the word before.
In fact, a lot of drugs that people use for depression or other things related to our mental state, they affect neurotransmitters.
I won't go into detail there, but they contain these neurotransmitters.
And when the calcium channels-- they're voltage gated-- when it becomes a little more positive, they open calcium floods in and what the calcium does is, it bonds to these proteins that have docked these vesciles.
So these little vesicles, they're docked to the presynpatic membrane or to this axon terminal membrane right there.
These proteins are actually called SNARE proteins.
It's an acronym, but it's also a good word because they've literally snared the vesicles to this membrane.
So that's what these proteins are.
And when these calcium ions flood in, they bond to these proteins, they attach to these proteins, and they change the confirmation of the proteins just enough that these proteins bring these vesicles closer to the membrane and also kind of pull apart the two membranes so that the membranes merge.
Let me do a zoom in of that just to make it clear what's going on.
So after they've bonded-- this is kind of before the calcium comes in, bonds to those SNARE proteins, then the SNARE protein will bring the vesicle ultra-close to the presynaptic membrane.
So that's the vesicle and then the presynaptic membrane will look like this and then you have your SNARE proteins.
And I'm not obviously drawing it exactly how it looks in the cell, but it'll give you the idea of what's going on.
Your SNARE proteins have essentially pulled the things together and have pulled them apart so that these two membranes merge.
And then the main side effect-- the reason why all this is happening-- is it allows those neurotransmitters to be dumped into the synaptic cleft. So those neurotransmitters that were inside of our vesicle then get dumped into the synaptic cleft.
This process right here is called exocytosis.
It's exiting the cytoplasm, you could say, of the presynaptic neuron. These neurotransmitters-- and you've probably heard the specific names of many of these-- serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine-- which is also adrenaline, but that's also a hormone, but it also acts as a neurotransmitter.
Norepinephrine, also both a hormone and a neurotransmitter.
So these are words that you've probably heard before.
But anyway, these enter into the synaptic cleft and then they bond on the surface of the membrane of the post-synaptic neuron or this dendrite.
Let's say they bond here, they bond here, and they bond here.
So they bond on special proteins on this membrane surface, but the main effect of that is, that will trigger ion channels.
So let's say that this neuron is exciting this dendrite.
So when these neurotransmitters bond on this membrane, maybe sodium channels open up.
So maybe that will cause a sodium channel to open up.
So instead of being voltage gated, it's neurotransmitter gated.
So this will cause a sodium channel to open up and then sodium will flow in and then, just like we said before, if we go to the original one, that's like this getting excited, it'll become a little bit positive and then if it's enough positive, it'll electrotonically increase the potential at this point on the axon hillock and then we'll have another neuron-- in this case, this neuron being stimulated.
So that's essentially how it happens.
It actually could be inhibitory.
You could imagine if this, instead of triggering a sodium ion channel, if it triggered a potassium ion channel.
If it triggered a potassium ion channel, potassium ion's concentration gradient will make it want to go outside of the cell.
So positive things are going to leave the cell if it's potassium.
Remember, I used triangles for potassium.
And so if positive things leave the cell, then if you go further down the neuron, it'll become less positive and so it'll be even harder for the action potential to start up because it'll need even more positive someplace else to make the threshold gradient.
I hope I'm not confusing you when I say that.
So this connection, the way I first described it, it's exciting.
When this guy gets excited from an action potential, calcium floods in.
It makes these vesicles dump their contents in the synaptic cleft and then that will make other sodium gates open up and then that will stimulate this neuron, but if it makes potassium gates open up, then it will inhibit it-- and that's how, frankly, these synapses work.
I was about to say there's millions of synapses, but that'd be incorrect.
There's trillions of synapses.
The best estimate of the number of synapses in our cerebral cortex is 100 to 500 trillion synapses just in the cerebral cortex.
The reason why we can have so many is that one neuron can actually form many, many, many, many synapses.
I mean, you can imagine if this original drawing of a cell, you might have a synapse here, a synapse here, a synapse there.
You could have hundreds or thousands of synapses even, into one neuron or going out of one neuron.
This might be a synapse with one neuron, another one, another one, another one.
So you'd have many, many, many, many, many connections.
And so synapses are really what give us the complexity of what probably make us tick in terms of our human mind and all of that.
But anyway, hopefully you found this useful.